A Practical Guide
for Policy Analysis
                                                       ﻿   i i i




     A Practical Guide
     for Policy Analysis
The Eightfold Path to More Effective
         Problem Solving
                  Fourth Edition


                Eugene Bardach
  Richard and Rhoda Goldman School of Public Policy,
           University of California, Berkeley
FOR INFORMATION:                                         Copyright © 2012 by CQ Press, an Imprint of SAGE
                                                         Publications, Inc. CQ Press is a registered trademark of
CQ Press                                                 Congressional Quarterly Inc.
An Imprint of SAGE Publications, Inc.
2455 Teller Road
                                                         All rights reserved. No part of this book may be
Thousand Oaks, California 91320
                                                         reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means,
E-mail: order@sagepub.com
                                                         electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
                                                         recording, or by any information storage and retrieval
SAGE Publications Ltd.
                                                         system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
1 Oliver’s Yard
55 City Road
London, EC1Y 1SP
United Kingdom
                                                         Printed in the United States of America
SAGE Publications India Pvt. Ltd.
B 1/I 1 Mohan Cooperative Industrial Area                Bardach, Eugene.
Mathura Road, New Delhi 110 044
India                                                    A practical guide for policy analysis : the eightfold path to
                                                         more effective problem solving / Eugene Bardach. — 4th ed.
SAGE Publications Asia-Pacific Pte. Ltd.
33 Pekin Street #02-01                                   p. cm.
Far East Square                                          Includes bibliographical references and index.
Singapore 048763
                                                         ISBN 978-1-60871-842-9 (pbk.: alk. paper)

                                                         1. Policy sciences. 2. Decision making. 3. Problem
                                                         solving. I. Title.
Acquisitions Editor: Charisse Kiino
Production Editor: Mirna Araklian
                                                         H97.B37 2011
Copy Editor: Amy Marks                                   320.6—dc23    2011032521
Typesetter: C&M Digitals (P) Ltd.
Proofreader: Stefanie Storholt                           Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Indexer: Marilyn Augst, Prairie Moon Indexing
Cover Designer: Catherine Anderson and Anne C. Kerns,   This book is printed on acid-free paper.
                   Anne Likes Red, Inc.
Marketing Manager: Chris O’Brien                         12 13 14 15 16 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
                    ABOUT THE AUTHOR




E   ugene Bardach has been teaching graduate-level policy analysis work-
    shop classes since 1973 at the Goldman School of Public Policy,
University of California, Berkeley, in which time he has coached some
400 projects. He is a broadly based political scientist with wide-ranging
teaching and research interests. His focus is primarily on policy imple-
mentation and public management, and most recently on problems of
facilitating better interorganizational collaboration in service delivery
(e.g., in human services, environmental enforcement, fire prevention,
and habitat preservation). He also maintains an interest in problems of
homeland defense regulatory program design and execution, particularly in
areas of health, safety, consumer protection, and equal opportunity.
Bardach has developed novel teaching methods and materials at Berkeley,
has directed and taught in residentially based training programs for
higher-level public managers, and has worked for the Office of Policy
Analysis at the U.S. Department of Interior. He is the recipient of the
1998 Donald T. Campbell Award of the Policy Studies Organization for
creative contribution to the methodology of policy analysis. This book is
based on his experience teaching students the principles of policy analy-
sis and then helping them to execute their project work.




                                                                        v
                      CONTENTS




PREFACE                                     xi

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS                            xiii

INTRODUCTION                               xv


PART I
THE EIGHTFOLD PATH                           1
  Step One: Define the Problem              1
  Step Two: Assemble Some Evidence         11
  Step Three: Construct the Alternatives   16
  Step Four: Select the Criteria           31
  Step Five: Project the Outcomes          47
  Step Six: Confront the Trade-Offs        63
  Step Seven: Decide!                      69
  Step Eight: Tell Your Story              70


PART II
ASSEMBLING EVIDENCE                        79
  Getting Started                          80
  Locating Relevant Sources                82
  Gaining Access and Engaging Assistance   89
  Conducting a Policy Research Interview   94


                                           vii
v i i i    c o n t e n t s




    Using Language to Characterize and Calibrate   103
    Protecting Credibility                         104
    Strategic Dilemmas of Policy Research          106


PART III
“SMART (BEST) PRACTICES” RESEARCH: UNDERSTANDING
AND MAKING USE OF WHAT LOOK LIKE GOOD IDEAS
FROM SOMEWHERE ELSE                                109
    Develop Realistic Expectations                 109
    Analyze Smart Practices                        110
    Observe the Practice                           115
    Describe Generic Vulnerabilities               119
    But Will It Work Here?                         120
    Back to the Eightfold Path                     123


APPENDIX A
SPECIMEN OF A REAL-WORLD POLICY ANALYSIS           125
    Preface                                        125
    Summary                                        126


APPENDIX B
THINGS GOVERNMENTS DO                              141
    Taxes                                          141
    Regulation                                     142
    Subsidies and Grants                           143
    Service Provision                              144
    Agency Budgets                                 145
    Information                                    145
    The Structure of Private Rights                146
    The Framework of Economic Activity             147
    Education and Consultation                     148
    Financing and Contracting                      148
    Bureaucratic And Political Reforms             149
                                                         c o n t e n t s    i x




APPENDIX C
UNDERSTANDING PUBLIC AND NONPROFIT INSTITUTIONS:
ASKING THE RIGHT QUESTIONS                                               151
  Mission                                                                151
  Environment                                                            151
  Performance Measurement                                                152
  Technology                                                             153
  Production/Delivery Processes                                          154
  Front-Line Workers and Co-Producers                                    155
  Partners and Other Outsiders                                           155
  Centralization/Decentralization                                        156
  Culture and Communications                                             156
  Politics                                                               156
  Leadership                                                             156
  Change                                                                 157


APPENDIX D
STRATEGIC ADVICE ON THE DYNAMICS OF GATHERING POLITICAL SUPPORT          159


REFERENCES                                                               167

INDEX                                                                    171
                      PREFACE




T   his handbook serves as a guide to concepts and methods applied in
    the analysis of policy. I have developed the general approach and
many of the specific suggestions over thirty-five years of teaching policy
analysis workshops to first- and second-year graduate students at the
Richard and Rhoda Goldman School of Public Policy, University of
California, Berkeley. In the handbook’s earliest incarnation, the ideas
took form slowly and were conveyed to students in lectures. But because
my faculty colleagues and I systematically overloaded our students with
work, they would sometimes skip a lecture—and thus miss out on ideas
that I regarded as essential. I determined that if I were to create a handout
for the students, at least I would have discharged my responsibility, and
it would be up to the students to retrieve the ideas they had missed. Over
the years, as the handout grew, it was disseminated informally to col-
leagues at other universities and was posted on the Web site of the
Electronic Hallway, based at the University of Washington. This book is
the outgrowth of these previous compilations and the product of many
years of experience.
   The presumed user is a beginning practitioner preparing to undertake a
policy analysis, such as one of our master’s students at the Goldman School.
But I have found this handbook useful at both ends of the spectrum—in
teaching undergraduate introduction to public policy courses as well as
executive education groups.



                                                                           xi
x i i    P R E F A CE




   The handbook assumes a familiarity with basic economic concepts,
including those having to do with market failures (including market
imperfections). It is not meant to stand alone but should be used in con-
junction with other sources, including some of the best textbooks in
policy analysis, which are cited often to amplify points in this handbook:
Weimer and Vining (2004); Stokey and Zeckhauser (1978); Behn and
Vaupel (1982); Friedman (2002); MacRae and Whittington (1997);
Gupta (2010); and Morgan and Henrion (1990).
   This new edition of A Practical Guide for Policy Analysis clarifies some
of the exposition, particularly with regard to “design problems” and the
choice of a “base case.” It also substitutes a new set of environmental
problems in Table I and the surrounding discussion that is more up-to-
date and more interesting than the previous one.
                     ACKNOWLEDGMENTS




I  wish to acknowledge the patience and helpful response of the students
   and friends who have used this handbook, especially those who withstood
its earlier versions. Special thanks are due Robert Behn, Joy Bonaguro,
Sandford Borins, Jose Canela-Cacho, Hank Dempsey, David Dery, John
Ellwood, Lee Friedman, David Garcia-Junco Machado, Nina Goldman,
David Kirp, Jake Lavin, Leo Levenson, Martin A. Levin, Duncan MacRae,
Sarah Marxer, Carolyn Marzke, Jane Mauldon, John Mendeloff, Michael
O’Hare, Steven Page, Eric Patashnik, Beryl Radin, Jesse Rothstein, Andres
Roemer, Larry Rosenthal, Mark Sabean, Eugene Smolensky, David
Weimer, and Marc Zegans.
    I wish to extend my thanks to my reviewers for their help with this
edition: Su Jin Jez, California State University, Sacramento; Daniel Press,
University of California, Santa Cruz; Thomas W. Taylor, Duke University;
and John Witte, University of Wisconsin-Madison. Thanks also go to
Charisse Kiino, Elise Frasier, Nancy Loh, and Sarah Fell of CQ Press for
their help in bringing this new edition to press. Many thanks to Amy
Marks, as well, for her sharp editorial recommendations.
    Sasha Dobrovolsky deserves my gratitude more than anyone else,
however. Sasha was in my undergraduate Public Policy 101 class in 1991.
An unusually gifted and entrepreneurial fellow, he once accosted me with
this announcement: “Professor Bardach, these handouts you give us are
outstanding. You should publish a book. When I graduate, I’m creating



                                                                        xiii
x i v    A C K NO W L E D G M ENTS




my own publishing house, and your book is the first I’m putting out.”
I said, “Sasha, you are surely mad. It’s fine by me, but I am not going to
be responsible for your financial losses. You are on your own.” Sasha did
exactly as promised. Alas, his publishing venture, Berkeley Academic
Press, did not last long, but he went on to great success in other fields.
I have unaccountably neglected to thank Sasha in the preface to earlier
editions. I hope I am now making sufficient amends.
                      INTRODUCTION




P  olicy analysis is a social and political activity. True, analysts take moral
   and intellectual responsibility for the quality of their policy-analytic
work. But policy analysis goes beyond personal decision making. First,
the subject matter concerns the lives and well-being of large numbers of
their fellow citizens. Second, the process and results of poli­cy analysis
usually involve other professionals and interested parties: it is often done
in teams or officewide settings; the immediate consumer is a “client” of
some sort, such as a hierarchical superior; and the ultimate audience will
include diverse subgroups of politically attuned supporters and oppo-
nents of the analysts’ work. All of these facts condition the nature of
policy analysis and have a bearing on the nature of what is meant by
“quality work.”
   A policy analyst can work in any number of positions. Once upon a
time, the term implied a rather wonkish individual who worked in a large
government bureaucracy, serving up very technical projections of the
possible impacts of one or more policy alternatives to some undersecre-
tary of planning. No longer. Today’s policy analysts help in planning,
budgeting, program evaluation, program design, program management,
public relations, and other functions. They work alone, in teams, and in
loose networks that cut across organizations. They work in the public,
nonprofit, and for-profit spheres. Although their work is ideally distin-
guished by transparency of method and interpretation, the analysts
themselves may explicitly bring to their jobs the values and passions of
advocacy groups as well as the technical expertise of “neutral” civil

                                                                            xv
x v i    I NT R O D U CT I ON




­servants. The professional networks in which they work may contain—in
 most cases, do contain—colleagues drawn from law, engineering,
 accounting, and so on, and in those settings the policy-analytic point of
 view has to struggle for the right to counter—or, better yet, synthesize—
 the viewpoints of these other professionals. Although policy-analytic
 work products typically involve written reports, they may also include
 briefings, slide presentations, magazine articles, and television inter-
 views. The recipients of these products may be broad and diffuse audi-
 ences as well as narrowly construed paying clients or employers.
    The advice in this handbook is directed both to policy analysts in
 practice and to students and others who, for whatever reasons, are
 attempting to look at the world through the eyes of a practitioner.

THE EIGHTFOLD PATH
Policy analysis is more art than science. It draws on intuition as much as
on method. Nevertheless, given the choice between advice that imposes
too much structure on the problem-solving process and advice that
offers too little, most beginning practitioners quite reasonably prefer too
much. I have therefore developed the following approach, which I call the
Eightfold Path:
    • Define the Problem
    • Assemble Some Evidence
    • Construct the Alternatives
    • Select the Criteria
    • Project the Outcomes
    • Confront the Trade-offs
    • Decide!
    • Tell Your Story
   These steps are not necessarily taken in precisely this order, nor are all of
them necessarily significant in every problem. However, an effort to define
the problem is usually the right starting place, and telling the story is almost
inevitably the ending point. Constructing alternatives and selecting criteria
for evaluating them must surely come toward the beginning of the process.
Assembling some evidence is actually a step that recurs throughout the
entire process, and it applies particularly to efforts to define the problem
and to project the outcomes of the alternatives being considered.
                                                       I NT R O D U CT I ON   x v i i




   The primary utility of this structured approach is that it reminds you
of important tasks and choices that otherwise might slip your mind; its
primary drawback is that, taken by itself, it can be mechanistic.

The Problem-Solving Process
The problem-solving process—being a process of trial and error—is
iterative, so you usually must repeat each of these steps, sometimes more
than once.
   The spirit in which you take any one of these steps, especially in the
ear­liest phases of your project, should be highly tentative. As you move
through the problem-solving process, you will probably keep changing
your problem definition, as well as your menu of alternatives, your set of
evaluative criteria, and your sense of what evidence bears on the problem.
With each successive iteration you will become a bit more confident that
you are on the right track, that you are focusing on the right question, and
so on. This can be a frustrating process, but it can also be rewarding—if
you learn to enjoy the challenges of search, discovery, and invention.

Some of the guidelines are practical, but most are conceptual.   Most of
the concepts used will seem obvious, but there are exceptions. First, tech-
nical terms are sometimes employed. Second, some commonsense terms
may be used in a special way that strips them of certain connotations and
perhaps imports others. For the most part, all these concepts will become
intelligible through experience and practice.

The concepts come embedded in concrete particulars.   In real life,
policy problems appear as a confusing welter of details: personalities,
interest groups, rhetorical demands, budget figures, legal rules and inter-
pretations, bureaucratic routines, citizen attitudes, and so on. Yet the
concepts described in this handbook are formulated in the abstract. You
therefore need to learn to “see” the analytic concepts in the concrete
manifestations of everyday life.

Caution: sometimes, some steps are already determined.   Suppose
your client says, “We need an extra million dollars to run this program in
the next budget year: find it.” Does the Eightfold Path apply to this
“analysis”? In a limited way. The client has already defined the problem
and narrowed the relevant criteria very tightly. There won’t be much
x v i i i    I NT R O D U CT I ON




creative scope for you when it comes to those steps. But all the other steps
are likely to be relevant.
   This challenge to “find it” is a simplified version of a more complex
challenge—“Design it,” as in “Figure out [that is, ‘design’] a way to pro-
tect this subway system from terrorist attack.” Here, too, the problem
definition step has already been settled by the client, though the other
steps are likely to get the creative juices flowing. Ideas for dealing with
design problems in general are introduced in the section headed “Step
Three: Construct the Alternatives.”

Your Final Product
So what will your final product look like? Here is a very rough sketch of
a typical written policy-analytic report:
    • In a coherent narrative style you describe some problem that needs
      to be mitigated or solved.
    • You lay out a few alternative courses of action that might be taken.
    • To each course of action you attach a set of projected outcomes that
      you think your client or audience would care about, suggesting the
      evidentiary grounds for your projections.
    • If no alternative dominates all other alternatives with respect to all
      the evaluative criteria of interest, you indicate the nature and mag-
      nitude of the trade-offs implicit in different policy choices.
    • Depending on the client’s expectations, you may state your own
      recommendation as to which alternative should be chosen.

The Spirit of the Eightfold Path
The spirit of the Eightfold Path is, I hope, economizing and uplifting.
Analyzing public policy problems is a complex activity. It is easy to get
lost, to waste a lot of time, to become demoralized. Other manuals and
textbooks in policy analysis are primarily concerned that you get the
analysis “right,” in some sense. This one should help in that respect, too.
But, in addition, I hope that this handbook will help you to get it done
with reasonable efficiency—and with a minimum of anxious confusion.
   Finally, just as policy analysis originates in politics, so it concludes
in politics. Political life has two sides: channeling conflict and building
                                                        I NT R O D U CT I ON   x i x




com­munity. Policy analysis serves both sides. It channels conflict by
showing that some arguments, and their proponents, are in some sense
superior to others and deserve to win out. But it helps to build commu-
nity by marking off potential common ground as well. This common
ground is defined by the rules and conventions of rational discourse—
where opponents may employ analytical procedures to resolve disagree-
ments, or where they may discover that at least some seemingly irreduc-
ible values conflicts can be recast as dry-as-dust technical disagreements
over how much higher a probability Policy A has than Policy B for
mitigating Problem P.

OVERVIEW OF THE BOOK
This book is a compilation of many component parts. The primary com-
ponent is Part I, describing the Eightfold Path and recommending heu-
ristics to help you negotiate it.
   Part II focuses on one particular step in the Eightfold Path: assembling
evidence. It first appeared thirty-five years ago as a journal article, but I
have since modified it and tried to integrate it better into the overall book
in terms of both style and content. I include it because its objective is, I
think, unique among the many prescriptive works in the social sciences
and in journalism about data gathering and interpretation: it is, above all,
concerned with using the researcher’s time and energy efficiently.
   Part III also addresses a specialized topic in policy analysis not dealt
with in other works: making use of ideas—and specimens of “smart
practices”—that are to be found in other sites. Imitation and adaptation
are standard routes to progress (albeit occasionally, to regress) in other
areas of life, so why not in public policy?
   In previous editions of this book, the third appendix offered a sum-
mary of “semantic tips.” It may not surprise readers to learn that seman-
tic pitfalls abound on the Eightfold Path of policy analysis, but it will
surely be more surprising that there are many semantic tricks to help
policy analysis along. Tips about these pitfalls and the tricks that can help
to bridge them appear throughout this volume, and these practical rec-
ommendations—no longer collected in a separate appendix—are now
highlighted in context by means of a new semantic tips icon that appears
at the beginning of each such discussion in Parts I, II, and III.
x x    I NT R O D U CT I ON




    Appendix A contains the preface and summary sections of a lengthy
study by researchers at the RAND Corporation on the relative worth of
mandatory minimum sentences for drug dealers. I include this material
because many students and fellow teachers have voiced the wish for a
specimen of real, high-quality policy analysis, along with some commen-
tary to highlight its most effective characteristics. Institutionally, RAND
is the oldest policy research organization in the country, if not the world.
It has a deserved reputation for excellence. It also has a tradition of doing
cost-effectiveness analysis, beginning with work for the military and, in
the past two or three decades, branching into domestic policy. It is there-
fore particularly fitting to make use of a specimen produced by RAND.
    Why this particular specimen? Not because its conclusions are neces-
sarily correct; I do not know enough about the drug policy field to have
an opinion. I do know that these are highly respected researchers in the
field and that the work selected here highlights the fifth, “Project the
Outcomes,” step in policy analysis—which I pronounce “the hardest step,”
mostly because of the uncertainties involved in projecting the future. The
chosen specimen wrestles in an interesting way with such uncertainties. It
also takes a creative approach to defining alternatives. And it illustrates
clearly how to integrate strictly analytical work into a larger policy discus-
sion rife with the value disagreements that are inevitably present in a
democratic, pluralistic society.
    Appendix B, “Things Governments Do,” is a condensed survey of
eleven types of governmental instruments for intervening in society. This
new edition also offers both a new Appendix C, “Understanding Public
and Nonprofit Institutions: Asking the Right Questions,” and an Appendix
D, “Strategic Advice on the Dynamics of Political Support.”
    I have tried to keep the style simple and the text short. But the topics
covered are numerous and complicated. The result is that the book is in
some respects very dense. My students tell me that the book should be
treated not just as a quick and pleasurable read, which of course it is, but
as a reference volume to be experienced again and again for its delicious
subtleties. No doubt they are right.
                                                                   PART




 THE EIGHTFOLD PATH
                                                                   I
T    he analytic work in problem solving generally proceeds in a certain
     direction, from defining the problem at the beginning all the way to
 making a decision and explaining it at the end. But remember, this is a pro-
 cess much given to reconsidering, reviewing, changing your mind—in other
 words, retracing your steps on the path before starting out once more. Also,
 in some cases, the client or, perhaps, the political situation has already nar-
 rowed and focused the analytic task to such a degree that you need not even
 bother thinking through some of the steps. The exposition that follows lays
 out a generic process that must be adapted to particular contexts.

 STEP ONE: DEFINE THE PROBLEM
 Your first problem definition is a crucial step: it gives you both a reason
 for doing all the work necessary to complete the project and a sense of
 direction for your evidence-gathering activity. And in the last phases of
 the policy analysis, your final problem definition will probably help you
 structure how you tell your story.

 Think of Deficit and Excess
Semantic Tip It often—but not always—helps to think in terms of deficit
 and excess. For instance:

   • “There are too many homeless people in the United States.”
   • “The demand for agricultural water is growing faster than our ability
     to supply it at an acceptable financial and environmental cost.”

                                                                              1
2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




    • “California’s population of school-age children is growing by
      140,000 per year, and our ability to develop the physical facilities in
      which to educate them is not growing nearly as fast.”

   It often helps to include the word too in the definition—as in “too big,”
“too small,” “growing too slowly,” “growing too fast.” These last two
phrases (about “growing”) remind us that problems deserving our atten-
tion don’t necessarily exist today but are (at least potentially) in prospect
for the future, whether near or distant.
   However, it does not help to think in terms of deficit and excess when
your problem is an already well-structured decision choice—for example,
“Dump the dredging spoils either in the Bay or somewhere out in the
Pacific Ocean.” Nor does it help if your challenge is to invent any way to
accomplish some defined objective—for example, “Find some grant
funds to close the anticipated gap between revenues and expenditures.”
These decision- and invention-type challenges are problems for the pol-
icy analyst but are not the substantive sort of problems I am addressing
in this section.

Make the Definition Evaluative
Remember that the idea of a “problem” usually means that people think
there is something wrong with the world, but note that wrong is a very
debatable term. Not everyone will agree that the facts you (or others)
have defined as a problem really do constitute a problem, for each person
may apply a different evaluative framework to these facts. Unfortunately,
there are no obvious or accepted ways to resolve philosophical differ-
ences of this type.
   A common philosophical as well as practical question is this: “What
private troubles warrant definition as public problems and thereby
legitimately raise claims for amelioration by public resources?” It is usu-
ally helpful to view the situation through the “market failure” lens
(Weimer and Vining 2004, chap. 5).1 In its simplest formulation, market

1. For an analysis of most traditional market failures in transaction cost terms, see
Zerbe and McCurdy (1999), which also emphasizes the rich variety of interventions
besides those undertaken by government to remedy traditionally conceived “market
failures.”
                                                    T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    3




failure occurs when the technical properties of a good or service have
one of the following effects:

  • Making it hard to collect payment from all the potential beneficiaries—
    for instance, the large number of people who profit, albeit indi-
    rectly, from advances in basic science
  • Making it hard to collect from the beneficiaries of consumption the
    true economic cost of making use of the good or service—such as
    the fresh air that vehicle owners use as a sink for their auto emissions
  • Making it hard for consumers (and sometimes suppliers) to know
    the true qualities of the good or service they are acquiring—for
    instance, many repair-type services, including those performed by
    physicians as well as those performed by auto mechanics
  • Making the cost of producing the marginal unit lower than the
    average cost within the relevant range of demand—such as a maga-
    zine article distributed via the Internet

    It is impossible to overestimate the importance of this point. In most—
though not all—situations in which no actual market failures can be iden-
tified, people’s private troubles cannot typically be ameliorated by even the
most well-intentioned governmental interventions. Even when some ame-
lioration is possible, there are usually many adverse side effects. In some
cases, it may nevertheless be worthwhile to pay the price of these side
effects, but such calculations must be done carefully and scrupulously.
    Besides market failures, the main situations in which private troubles
can warrant definition as public problems are these:

  • Breakdowns of systems, such as family relationships, that occur
    largely outside markets
  • Low living standards that arise precisely because markets do func-
    tion well and do not reward individuals very generously if they lack
    marketable talents or skills
  • The existence of discrimination against racial and other minorities
  • The failure of government to function well in areas in which it is
    traditionally expected to act effectively (e.g., in providing public
    schools)
4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




Using issue rhetoric. Usually, the raw material for the evaluative aspect of
your initial problem definition comes from your client and derives from
the ordinary language of debate and discussion in the client’s political
environment—language that I call generically “issue rhetoric.” Such
rhetoric may be narrowly confined to a seemingly technical problem or
broadly located in a controversy of wide social interest. In either case, you
have to get beyond the rhetoric to define a problem that is analytically
manageable and that makes sense in light of the political and institu-
tional means available for mitigating it.
   Use the raw material of issue rhetoric with care. It often points to
some condition of the world that people don’t like or consider “bad”
in some sense, such as “teenage pregnancy,” “media violence,” or “glob-
al warming.” These evaluations do not necessarily need to be taken at
face value. You will sometimes wish to explore the philosophical and
empirical grounds on which you, your client, or others in your even-
tual audience should or should not consider the alleged condition
“bad.” Furthermore, issue rhetoric may point to some alleged—but not
necessarily real—cause of the troubling condition, such as “welfare” or
“human wastefulness.”
   Issue rhetoric often has a partisan or ideological flavor. Although
Americans cluster toward a mixed-ideology and pragmatic center, issue
rhetoric is created by the more passionate and often more articulate indi-
viduals who settle closer to the extremes. The great ideological divide in
most developed democracies concerns the role of government assistance
and regulation in solving problems relative to reliance on self, kin, and
neighbors. Self-reliance is generally presumed to be the ideal, but this is
a rebuttable presumption. “Liberal” issue rhetoric typically offers many
rebuttals, usually involving distrust of “the market,” but only some of
these rebuttals are grounded in realistic understanding of how markets
do and do not work. “Conservative” issue rhetoric sometimes offers
thoughtless defenses of “the market” but can also fall silent when favored
business interests seek protectionist legislation. Because government as
an institution is the chief alternative to private and community problem-
solving, liberals and conservatives alike ideologize the question of just
how competent and trustworthy it is. Selective perception abounds on
both sides of this argument.
                                                      T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    5




   Generalities originating in issue rhetoric only sometimes suffice to
settle concrete issues of policy choice and policy design, although eco-
nomic theories of market failures and imperfections can often tell us
when not to rely on the market, and public choice theories of government
failure can often tell us when not to rely on the government (Weimer and
Vining 2004; Glazer and Rothenberg 2001). Policy analysis typically
bridges all political ideologies by reliance on the normative standard of
“maximizing welfare” and on social science theorizing about the com-
parative advantages of different institutions for different purposes. Thus
you want not simply to echo the issue rhetoric in your problem definition,
but to use it as raw material for a provisional problem definition that you
hope will prove analytically useful.
   Note also that some issue labels may signify more than one problem.
Depending on the audience, for example, “teenage pregnancy” may con-
note any or all of the following conditions: sexual immorality, the blight-
ing of young people’s and their children’s life chances, exploitation of
taxpayers, and social disintegration. Usually you will want to determine
a primary problem focus, to ensure that the analysis does not get out of
hand. But if the problems aren’t too complicated, you may feel willing to
define more than one.

Quantify If Possible
Your problem definition should, insofar as possible, include a quantitative
feature. Assertions of deficit or excess should come with magnitudes attached.
How big is “too big”? How small is “too small”? How about “too slowly” or
“too fast”? With regard to homelessness, how many homeless people are
there in the United States? Or in the case of agricultural water, how many
acre-feet of water are used now, and how does that amount compare with the
demand in some specified future year (given certain assumptions about
water pricing)? Exactly what is “our ability to develop physical facilities for
water storage,” and how do we expect it to grow, or shrink, over time?
   If necessary, gather information to help you calibrate the relevant mag-
nitudes. (See the discussion under “Step Two: Assemble Some Evidence.”)
   In many or most cases, you will have to estimate—or, more likely,
“guesstimate”—the magnitudes in question. Sometimes you should
furnish a range as well as a point estimate of magnitudes—for example,
6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




“Our best guess of the number of homeless persons in families is
250,000, although the truth could lie between 100,000 and 400,000.”
   Even if you cannot come up with good numbers yourself, qualita-
tively defining a metric that might be used to quantify the problem helps
you make your problem definition more behavioral and concrete. It is
better to say, “Too many people with annual incomes over $60,000 are
living in subsidized apartments,” than simply, “Too many relatively well-
off people are taking advantage of low-rent public housing.” The $60,000
value provides desirable texture and information about a threshold num-
ber that will serve in the promised analysis.

Diagnose Conditions That Cause Problems
Some problematic conditions are not experienced as troublesome per se
by citizens but are perceived by them, or by analysts working on their
behalf, to be causes of trouble. It is sometimes useful to diagnose at least
one alleged condition of this type and to define it as a problem to be
mitigated or removed—as in, “One of the problems in the air pollution
area is that states have not been willing to force motorists to keep their
engines tuned up and their exhaust systems in proper order.”

Semantic Tip Note that this sort of problem definition is not merely
descriptive but is also diagnostic. It implicitly asserts that some condition,
which people may or may not find troubling on its own, is an important
cause of some other condition that is indeed troubling. Problem defini-
tions that pretend to such diagnostic power can be useful, but they can
also be treacherous. Suppose, after all, that the causal diagnosis is mis-
taken or misleading—for example, that states’ unwillingness to enforce
engine maintenance routines is not in fact a very important cause of air
pollution. Because the term definition in some contexts connotes legiti-
mate arbitrariness (“I’ll define justice to mean . . .”), the causal claims
implicit in diagnostic problem definitions can easily escape needed scru-
tiny. (See “Step Five: Project the Outcomes” for further discussion.)

Risky Conditions: “The Odds”
“The odds are too high that this nuclear reactor will suffer an accident in
the next twenty-five years that will emit excessive radiation.” This sentence
                                                          T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    7




does indicate a problem, but it is not something tangible, like “too many
cases of asthma are being reported in this neighborhood.” It refers to risk
and is stated in probabilistic language dealing with “the odds.”

Semantic Tip Referring to “the odds” is a useful way to talk about any-
thing that is uncertain in your analysis, not just the problem definition.
It can also refer to the uncertain prospects of an alternative’s working out
as planned, or the likelihood that a key political actor will remain in
office in order to oversee policy implementation. It is an especially useful
locution when talking about uncertainties that are particularly resistant
to quantification, for example, “The odds are that the U.S. nuclear mod-
ernization program is causing other countries to look more favorably on
acquiring nuclear weaponry themselves.”
    The odds formulation can also be used for specifying criteria. For
instance, one could say that one criterion is “Maximize the odds that the
People’s Party will control the upper chamber following the next election”
or “minimize the odds that teens in the catchment area of this program
will reject it because it is not ‘cool’.”

Identify Latent Opportunities
A special kind of problem is an opportunity missed. Is it not rather small-
minded to think of policy analysis as devoted merely to the amelioration of
problems? May policy analysis not rise above the tedious and uninspiring
business of patching and fixing? Can we not aspire to a world in which we
can identify opportunities to do creative—not to say wonderful—things?
“If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it” is a confining idea, and certainly policy analysts,
policymakers, and public managers ought not to allow the “problem” focus
to restrict the search for plausible opportunities. Unfortunately, the working
agenda of most policy professionals is set by complaints, threats, worries,
and troubles—often leaving little time or energy to think about improve-
ments that no one has identified as needful. Still, if latent opportunities are
really lying around, it would be a pity to ignore them.
   Where do we find opportunities for creative policy improvements that
haven’t first been identified by complaints, threats, and so on? Little aca-
demic or technical theory is available to answer this question. But Box I-1
(p. 8) contains a list that is suggestive.
8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




    BOX I-1           Some Generic Opportunities for Social Improvement
                      That Often Go Unnoticed

    Operations research strategies.   By means of sequencing, timing, prioritiz-
    ing, matching, clustering, and other such rationalizing arrangements, it
    may be possible to use a fixed stock of resources to achieve higher produc-
    tivity than is possible otherwise. For instance, provided that traffic flow
    conditions are within certain parameters, high-occupancy-vehicle (HOV)
    lanes can maximize vehicle throughput in a fixed section of roadway.
    Cost-based pricing.   Discrepancies between prices and real costs present an
    opportunity for enhancing social welfare by adjusting prices to better
    reflect reality. For instance, introducing congestion tolls, eliminating cross-
    subsidies for peak-period utilization of electricity, or removing rent con-
    trols would each bring prices more into line with real costs.
    By-products of personal aspirations.   It is possible to structure new incen-
    tives or create new opportunities for personal advantage or satisfaction that
    can indirectly result in social benefit. For example, public-sector employers
    can offer to share the benefits of cost-reducing innovations with the
    employees who conceive them and implement them.
    Complementarity.   Two or more activities can potentially be joined so that
    each may make the other more productive. For example, increased public
    works construction can combat unemployment.
    Input substitution.   The world abounds in opportunities to substitute less
    costly inputs in a current production process while achieving roughly
    equivalent results. For instance, municipalities can hire lower-paid civilians
    to perform police clerical tasks rather than use expensive uniformed officers.




Avoid Common Pitfalls in Problem Definition
Problem definition is a step beset by at least two dangerous pitfalls.

Semantic Tip Defining the solution into the “problem.” Your problem
definition should not include an implicit solution introduced by seman-
tic carelessness. Projected solutions must be evaluated empirically and
not legitimated merely by definition. Therefore, keep the problem defini-
tion stripped down to a mere description, and leave open where you will
look for solutions.
                                                     T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    9




Development.   A sequence of activities or operations may be arranged to
take advantage of a developmental process. For example, a welfare agency can
assess clients for employability and vocational interest before, rather than
after, sending them out to search for a job.
Exchange.   Unrealized possibilities for exchange can increase social
value. Policymakers typically design policies to simulate market-like
arrangements—for example, conducting pollution permit auctions, or
reimbursing an agency for services it renders to another agency’s clients
or customers.
Multiple functions.   A system can be designed so that one feature has the
potential to perform two or more functions. For example, a tax adminis-
trator can dramatize an enforcement case in such a way as both to deter
potential violators and to reassure nonviolators that they are not being
played for suckers because of their honesty.
Nontraditional participants.   Line-level employees of public agencies—as
well as their customers, clients, or the parties whom they regulate—often
have knowledge of potential program improvements that could usefully
be incorporated into the agencies’ policies and operations. The IRS, for
instance, has sought feedback from ordinary tax filers about how to improve
federal tax forms.
Underutilized capacity.   Governments sometimes systematically under-
utilize resources at their disposal. In many communities, school facilities
are used for relatively limited purposes for only part of the day and for
only part of the year—although school officials would be quick to warn
that tapping this capacity without harming school functions is not
always easy.




• Don’t say: “There is too little shelter for homeless families.” Inadver­
  tently implying that “more shelter” is the best solution may inhibit you
  from thinking about ways to prevent families from becoming home-
  less in the first place. Try instead: “Too many families are homeless.”
• Don’t say: “New schools are being built too slowly.” Simply assum-
  ing that “more schools” is the solution may inhibit you from think-
  ing about ways to use existing facilities more efficiently or even to
  try forms of “distance learning.” Try instead: “There are too many
  schoolchildren relative to the currently available classroom space.”
1 0    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




   A tip-off that you’re probably smuggling an implicit solution into the
problem definition is to hear yourself saying, “Aha, but that’s not the real
problem; the real problem is . . .” While there are better and worse ways
to conceptualize a problem—or to solve a problem—it stretches ordinary
usage too much to say that one problem could be “more [or less] real”
than another.

Accepting too easily the causal claims implicit in diagnostic problem
definitions. I suggested earlier that conditions that cause problems may
also be problems themselves. However, the causes must be real, not
merely assumed. You have to evaluate the causal chain that goes from
the situation itself to the bad effects it is alleged to cause, and to con-
vince yourself that the causal relationship is real. For instance, for some
people, cocaine use is not a problem in itself, but it may become a prob-
lem if it leads to crime, poor health, family disintegration, and so on.
But does it lead to these outcomes, and to what degree? The evidence
on this question should be evaluated very carefully before you decide
that it’s okay to work with a problem definition that sounds like “too
much cocaine use.”

Iterate
Problem definition is a crucial step. Because it is hard to get it right, how-
ever, you may take that same step again and again. Also, your empirical
and conceptual understanding will evolve over the course of your ana-
lytic work. For instance, you may start out thinking that the main prob-
lem is “too many halfway houses for the mentally ill in our city” but end
up concluding that the main problem is how badly some of them are
managed.2 As you begin to rule out alternative approaches to solving or
mitigating your problem, you will probably want to sculpt the problem
definition so that, in the end, you and the political system will have some
chance of attacking the problem successfully. Finally, if you are working in
an office or agency context, you will implicitly be negotiating a mutually


2. This happened to a graduate student group at the Goldman School whose client
was the Oakland Police Department. Members of the group struggled hard to escape
the initial assumptions held by their client and eventually to refocus their work.
                                                           T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    1 1




 acceptable problem definition with your analyst colleagues and your hier-
 archical superiors.3

 STEP TWO: ASSEMBLE SOME EVIDENCE
 All of your time doing a policy analysis is spent on two activities: think-
 ing (sometimes aloud and sometimes with others) and hustling data
 that can be turned into evidence. Of these two activities, thinking is
 generally the more important, but hustling data takes much more time:
 reading documents, hunting in libraries, poring over studies and statis-
 tics, interviewing people, traveling to interviews, waiting for appoint-
 ments, and so on.
    The real-world settings in which policy analysis is done rarely afford
 the time for a research effort that would please a careful academic
 researcher. In fact, time pressure is probably almost as dangerous an
 enemy of high-quality policy analysis as is politically motivated bias, if
 not more so. Therefore, economize on your data collection activities. The
 key to economizing is this: try to collect only those data that can be
 turned into “information” that, in turn, can be converted into “evidence”
 that has some bearing on your problem.

Semantic Tip For the logically minded, here are some definitions: Data
 are facts—or, some might say, representations of facts—about the
 world. Data include all sorts of statistics but go well beyond statistics,
 too. Data also include, for instance, facts about an agency manager’s
 ability to deal constructively with the press. Information consists of data
 that have “meaning,” in the sense that they can help you sort the world
 into different logical or empirical categories. The prevalence of cigarette
 smoking in five different countries constitutes data, but these data
 become information when you decide it is interesting to array the coun-
 tries comparatively (e.g., from lowest to highest prevalence). Evidence is

 3. Some analysts also claim that it is simply not worthwhile to define as “problems”
 conditions that cannot be ameliorated: “Problems are better treated as opportunities
 for improvement; defined problems, as problems of choice between alternative
 means to realize a given opportunity. The process of problem definition would then
 be one of search, creation, and initial examination of ideas for solution until a prob-
 lem of choice is reached.” See Dery (1984, 27).
1 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




information that affects the existing beliefs of important people
(including yourself) about significant features of the problem you are
studying and how it might be solved or mitigated. Differential preva-
lence of smoking, for instance, can become evidence bearing on
hypotheses concerning different levels of concern about personal
health across countries.
   You need evidence for three principal purposes, all of which are rele-
vant to the goal of producing realistic projections of possible policy
outcomes. One purpose is to assess the nature and extent of the
problem(s) you are trying to define. A second is to assess the particular
features of the concrete policy situation you are engaged in studying. For
instance, you may need to know—or guess—about agency workloads,
recent budget figures, demographic changes in a service area, the political
ideology of the agency chief, the competency of the middle-level manag-
ers in the agency, and the current attitudes of some other agency that
nominally cooperates with yours on some problem. The third purpose is
to assess policies that have been thought, by at least some people, to have
worked effectively in situations apparently similar to your own, in other
jurisdictions, perhaps, or at other times. (Sometimes these situations will
have been evaluated statistically and sometimes not: see Part III, “‘Smart
(Best) Practices’ Research: Understanding and Making Use of What Look
Like Good Ideas from Somewhere Else.”)
   Because each of these purposes becomes salient in different phases of
the policy analysis process, the second step on the Eightfold Path,
“Assemble Some Evidence,” will be taken more than once but with a dif-
ferent focus each time.

Think Before You Collect
Thinking and collecting data are complementary activities: you can be a
much more efficient collector of data if you think, and keep on thinking,
about what you do and don’t need (or want) to know, and why. The
principal—and exceedingly common—mistake made by beginners and
veterans alike is to spend time collecting data that have little or no
potential to be developed into evidence concerning anything you actu-
ally care about. People often do this because running around collecting
data looks and feels productive, whereas first-rate thinking is hard and
                                                   T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    1 3




frustrating. Also, when they see you busily collecting data, the people
paying for your work tend to be reassured that somehow they are getting
their money’s worth.

The value of evidence. Since most evidence is costly to produce, you must
weigh its likely cost against its likely value. How is its likely value to be
estimated? The answer may be cast in a decision-analytic framework
(decision trees), though remember that the process of making a decision
involves a great many elements prior to the moment of actual choice, such
as defining a useful problem, thinking up better candidate solutions, and
selecting a useful model. In general, the value of any piece of evidence
depends on these factors:

  • The likelihood that it will cause you to substitute some better deci-
    sion for whatever decision you would have made without it (which
    might have been an “acceptable” decision in and of itself)
  • The likelihood that the substituted decision will, directly or indi-
    rectly, produce a better policy outcome than the outcome that would
    have been produced by the original decision
  • The magnitude of the difference in value between the likely-to-be-
    improved outcome and the original outcome

The utility of an educated guess. It is surprising how well you can do in
many cases by gathering no evidence at all but simply by sitting down
and thinking something through and then making some serious edu-
cated guesses. There is nothing shameful about acting on such guessti-
mates and thereby conserving your data-collecting time and energies for
answering questions for which good evidence is really necessary (see Part II,
“Assembling Evidence”).
   A helpful check on your thinking, to avoid collecting useless data, is to
ask yourself the following questions before embarking on some data col-
lection venture:

  • “Suppose the data turn out to look like so-and-so as opposed to
    thus-and-such. What implication would that have for my under-
    standing of how to solve this problem?”
1 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




    • “Compared to my best guess about how the data will look once I’ve
      got them, how different might they look if I actually took the trouble
      to get them?”
    • “How much is it worth to me to confirm the actual difference
      between what I can guess and what I can learn about the world by
      really getting the data?”

   It is this sort of critical attitude about the value of expensive data col-
lection (especially ad hoc surveys!) that often leads good and experienced
policy analysts to make do with back-of-the-envelope estimates. However,
none of this reasoning is meant to be an excuse for shirking the job of
getting good data—and sometimes a lot of it, at huge costs in time and
money—when you’ve convinced yourself that the investment really will
pay off. There’s an obvious and critical difference between justifiable and
unjustifiable guesstimates.

Review the Available Literature
There hardly exists a problem on whose causes and solutions some aca-
demic discipline or professional association is not doing research. It is
easy to find journals and various professional publications disseminating
research results, theories, case studies, the musings of experienced prac-
titioners, and so on. The Internet brings much of this literature to your
desktop.
    Advocacy organizations often publish a great deal of interesting work
and may take special pains to disseminate their findings on the Internet.
However, because advocacy-based analyses are not, in general, as reliable
as more disinterested work, there is a danger of relying too much on such
sources just because they are readily available.

Survey “Best Practices”
The chances are good that the problem you are studying is not unique,
and that policymakers and public managers in other jurisdictions, per-
haps not very different from the one you are studying, have already dealt
with it in some fashion. See if you can track down some of these past
solutions and extrapolate them to the situation you are studying. Bear in
                                                    T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    1 5




mind, however, that the extrapolation process is complicated (see Part III,
“‘Smart (Best) Practices’ Research”).

Use Analogies
Sometimes it pays to gather data about things that, on the surface, seem
quite unlike the problem you are studying but, on a deeper level, show
instructive similarities. For instance, your understanding of how a merit
pay plan for compensating managers in the public sector might work
could perhaps be improved by seeing how similar schemes work in the
private sector. Or, if you are working on the problem of how a state can
discipline, and perhaps disbar, incompetent attorneys, you might use-
fully spend a good deal of your time learning about how the medical
profession handles problems of physician incompetence. If you are work-
ing on how to reduce neighborhoods’ resistance to accepting low-income
housing projects, you could usefully look into the literature on commu-
nity resistance to accepting solid-waste incinerators.
   As these examples suggest, some analogies are easier to perceive, and to
make sense of, than others. It takes a little imagination to see an instruc-
tive analogy and, occasionally, a little daring to try to convince others to
recognize both its usefulness and its inevitable limitations.

Start Early
You are often dependent on the very busy schedules of other people
whom you ask to furnish information or to make time for an interview.
It is extremely important to submit requests for information—and
especially for interviews—well in advance of when you want to have
completed the data collection. (For a useful description of how to con-
duct literature reviews, library searches, phone interviews, and personal
interviews, see Weimer and Vining 2004, chap. 13; see also Part II,
“Assembling Evidence.”)

Touch Base, Gain Credibility, Broker Consensus
The process of assembling evidence inevitably has a political as well as a
purely analytic purpose. Sometimes it entails touching base with poten-
tial critics of your work so that they will not be able to complain later that
1 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




you have ignored their perspectives. Conversely, by making yourself
known to potential supporters of your work, you may be able to create a
cadre of defenders.
   A more complex objective, where appropriate, might be to blend
policy analysis with the process of improving a policy idea or decision
during the course of implementation. (See the following discussion of
“improvability” as a practical criterion.) This objective entails obtaining
feedback from participants, usually in an iterative process, and sharing
some of your own reactions with them. You thereby become more of a
partner in the process than an outside observer and diagnostician. An
even more complex and challenging role would be for you to become a
particular type of “partner,” a facilitator and broker, whether by acting as
a conduit from one person to another or by convening meetings and
other gatherings.

Free the Captive Mind
In exchange for access to data and a ready-made worldview, researchers
sometimes uncritically accept problem definitions and preferred solutions
from kindly informants (not to mention from paying clients or employers).
To counter such temptations, be sure to make contact with individuals
or factions whom you would expect to disagree—the more sharply the
better—with those informants. A time-saving, but only partial, substitute
is to ask your kindly informants, “Who might object strongly to your point
of view about this, and why might they do so?”4

STEP THREE: CONSTRUCT THE ALTERNATIVES
By alternatives I mean something like “policy options,” or “alternative
courses of action,” or “alternative strategies of intervention to solve or
mitigate the problem.”

Beware a Linguistic Pitfall
Semantic Tip Specifying alternatives does not necessarily signify that
the policy options are mutually exclusive. Policy analysts use the term


4. For an excellent discussion of this process, see Klitgaard, forthcoming.
                                                    T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    1 7




alternative ambiguously: sometimes it means one choice that implies fore-
going another, and sometimes it means simply one more policy action
that might help to solve or mitigate a problem, perhaps in conjunction
with other alternatives. Be aware of the ambiguity in other people’s usage,
and in telling your story (see Step Eight), be sure that no such ambiguity
enters your own usage.
   Sometimes you won’t be entirely sure whether two alternatives are or
are not mutually exclusive. For instance, although the mayor may have
promised enough money to either fix potholes or provide homeless shel-
ters (but not both), you may have made such a great case for both pro-
grams that the mayor may decide to increase the budgetary allocation.

Start Comprehensive, End Up Focused
In the last stages of your analysis, you won’t want to be assessing more
than two or three principal alternatives, but in the beginning, err on the
side of comprehensiveness. Make a list of all the alternatives you might
wish to consider in the course of your analysis. Later on, you will discard
some obvious losers, combine others, and reorganize still others into a
single “basic” alternative with one or more subsidiary “variants.” For your
initial list, though, where should you turn for ideas?
   One starting point would be to note the alternatives that key political
actors are actively proposing or seem to have on their minds. These may
include prominent people’s pet ideas, institutions’ inventories of “off-
the-shelf ” proposals that simply await a window of opportunity, and
prepackaged proposals that political ideologues are perennially advocat-
ing. Then you could try to design alternatives that might prove to be
superior to the alternatives currently being discussed by the key political
actors. It’s good to brainstorm, to try to be creative—but don’t expect
that you will necessarily produce much better ideas than those that other
people have already advanced.
   One way to coax your creativity is to refer to the checklist in Appendix B,
“Things Governments Do.” For each entry on the list, ask yourself: “Might
it make sense to try some version of this generic strategy to help miti-
gate this problem?” Because it is a comprehensive list, the answer with
respect to any single strategy will usually be no. Going through the list
systematically is worthwhile, however. Because the list is not very long,
1 8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




with experience you will need to spend only a few minutes to decide
whether any ideas there might be worth considering further. (See also the
valuable discussion about generic policy instruments in Weimer and
Vining 2004, chap. 10.)

Semantic Tip Always include in your first approach to the problem the
alternative “Let present trends (or ‘business-as-usual’) continue undis-
turbed.” You need to do this because the world is full of naturally occur-
ring, ongoing changes, some of which may mitigate, or worsen, the
problem on which you are working. (Note that I am not characterizing
this alternative as “Do nothing.” It is not possible to do nothing or to “not
decide.” Most of the trends in motion will probably persist and alter the
problem, whether for better or for worse.)
    To see if “natural” change will affect the scope of the problem, inspect
its most common sources in the public policy environment: (1) political
changes following elections, as well as changes induced by the prospect of
having to contest an election; (2) changes in unemployment and inflation
rates that accompany the business cycle; (3) the changing “tightness” or
“looseness” of agency budgets caused by overall taxing and spending poli-
cies; (4) demographic changes, such as population migration patterns and
population “bulges” moving through certain age levels; and (5) changing
technologies. In most cases, however, this “let-present-trends-continue”
option will drop out of your final analysis. It follows that if you do your
problem definition work well, you will end up with an important problem
in your sights that in most cases can be mitigated to some degree by pur-
posive action.
    Another frequently helpful alternative is “Learn more.” This can be
done by using pilot studies, or by looking around for examples of “smart
practices” elsewhere (see Part III), or by waiting for the future to get less
murky, or perhaps by negotiating further with important players to
ascertain what they might do under various contingencies. Don’t forget
that there is a cost to waiting if, in the absence of further learning, you
would have guessed “the right conclusion” anyway. Conversely, there is a
cost to premature decision making or action if you are likely to make a
consequential mistake that could be corrected by further learning.
                                                    T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    1 9




Model the System in Which the Problem Is Located
We often think about alternative approaches to the problem as possible
interventions in the system that holds the problem in place or keeps it
going. Logically, it is not necessary to model the causes of a problem in
order to cure it—pharmaceutical manufacturers can testify that many of
their successful products work by unknown causal routes on conditions
whose causes are not at all understood. But a good causal model is often
quite useful for suggesting possible “intervention points.” This is espe-
cially true when the problem is embedded in a complex system of inter-
acting forces, incentives, and constraints—which is usually the case.
Consider, for instance, a system that produces “too much traffic conges-
tion” at some choke point such as a bridge or a tunnel. A sketch of the
relevant causal model would include the demand for travel along the
relevant route, the available alternative modes of travel, the amount of
roadway capacity, and the price to users of roadway capacity. An efficient
and simple—but usually politically unpopular—intervention might be
to increase the price to users so as to reflect the degree to which each user
contributes to congestion and increased travel times.
   How self-conscious, elaborate, and rigorous should your causal model
be? Many social scientists who devote themselves to policy analysis would
hold, “The more so the better.” I say, “Yes, but . . . .” Self-consciousness is
highly desirable. Elaborateness (or comprehensiveness—in this case a
near synonym) is desirable because it decreases the risk of missing impor-
tant causal connections, but it can blur the analytic focus and blunt cre-
ativity in designing intervention strategies. Rigor is desirable if it prevents
you from relying on unarticulated and false assumptions; its downside
is that it may persuade you to exclude factors that are important—for
instance, the personalities of certain actors—because you don’t know
how to model their effect rigorously or because you have only hunches
regarding the facts.
   Many models are best thought of as elaborations of a fundamental
metaphor. They can be mathematically precise or verbal and evocative.
Some commonly used metaphors that are the bases for models of par-
ticular value in designing alternatives are discussed in the following
sections.
2 0    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




Market models. The model of a market in which disaggregated suppliers
exchange goods or services with disaggregated demanders can apply to
unpriced goods and services. The main idea behind the market model is
really equilibration through exchange. Hence, the market model can be
applied to many phenomena other than the production and allocation of
textbook goods such as widgets or apples.
   For instance, you might try to understand the flow of patients into a
state mental hospital system in terms of supply and demand: there is a
fixed short-run “supply” of available beds in state hospitals and a per-
diem charge for each, and a complex “demand” for their use generated by
police departments, county psychiatric emergency units, judges, mem-
bers of the public, and so on.
   A standard intervention strategy for improving markets that are not
working as well as they might is to find some way to raise or lower the
prices faced by either suppliers or demanders.

Production models. Unfortunately, little academic literature has exam-
ined the operating logics of the common types of production systems
found in public policy—such as command-and-control regulation, the
provision of information, and all the other “Things Governments Do”
that are described briefly in Appendix B. (However, see Weimer and
Vining 2004, chap. 10, on “generic policies”; see also Salamon 2002.) In
any case, the main concern in understanding production systems should
be to identify the parameters whose values, when they move out of a
certain range, make the systems most vulnerable to breakdown, fraud
and abuse, egregious diseconomies, and the distortion of intended pur-
pose. It is also helpful to know about those parameters that matter most
when we try to upgrade a production system from mere adequacy to
performance levels we might think of as “excellent” (see Part III, “‘Smart
(Best) Practices’ Research”).
   Another way to look at production models is through optimization
lenses. Operations research models—such as queuing, inventory man-
agement, Markov processes—are relevant here.5

5. For a good, brief discussion, see Stokey and Zeckhauser (1978) and Victorio (1995);
also see the models, particularly that of case management, in Rosenthal (1982).
                                                       T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    2 1




Evolutionary models. An evolutionary model describes a common pro-
cess of change over time. It is constructed of three important subpro-
cesses: variation among competitors, selection, and retention. Suppose,
for instance, that in an agency enforcing health-related standards in the
workplace, the complaints disproportionately concerned visible and
annoying problems that were not, however, as hazardous to worker
health as less visible and annoying problems. In this case, the evolu-
tionary model suggests several plausible intervention points. The
agency might try to educate workers to detect and complain about
more serious problems, contriving thereby to swamp the less serious
problems—thus changing the pool of “competitors.” It might start
screening the complaints for their likelihood of being associated with
more fruitful targets—thus changing the “selection mechanism.” Or it
might attempt to persuade workers, and perhaps their union represen-
tatives, to reduce their propensity to complain about matters the
agency wishes to hear less about—thus changing the “retention mecha-
nism,” workers’ attitudes.6

Conceptualize and Simplify the List of Alternatives
The final list of alternatives—the one you include in your presentation to
your client and other audiences—will almost certainly look quite differ-
ent from the one you started with. Not only will you have thrown out
some that just don’t look very good, but you will also have done some
work to conceptualize and simplify alternatives.

Semantic Tip The key to conceptualization is to try to sum up the basic
strategic thrust of an alternative in a simple sentence or even a phrase. This
is difficult but usually worth the effort. It helps to use very plain, short
phrases stripped of jargon. When the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) was created, the first administrator confronted (a partial list of)
alternatives that might have been described as thus: “Let the states do the
work; let the feds give them the money”; “Remove impediments to firms
cooperating on antipollution research”; and “Sue the bastards” (meaning

6. For other ideas and an excellent discussion of the uses of models generally, see
Lave and March (1975).
2 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




the large, visibly polluting firms and industries, the prosecution of which
would help build political support for the new agency).
   The key to simplification is to distinguish between a basic alternative
and its variants. The basic element in many policy alternatives is an inter-
vention strategy—such as regulatory enforcement or a subsidy or a tax
incentive—that causes people or institutions to change their conduct in
some way.7 But no intervention strategy can stand alone; it must be imple-
mented by some agency or constellation of agencies (perhaps including
nonprofit organizations), and it must have a source of financing. Usually
the variants on the basic strategy are defined by different methods of
implementation and different methods of financing.
   The distinction between a basic strategy and variants based on imple-
mentation details is especially helpful when you have a lot of possible
solutions to consider and you need to reduce the complexity involved in
comparing them. Making the distinction puts you in a position to break
your analysis into successive steps. In the first step, you might compare,
say, three basic alternatives while ignoring the details described by their
variants. Then, once you have decided on one of these basic alternatives,
you could turn to comparing the variants.
   For example: You want to decrease the prevalence of heroin use in
your county by 50 percent over the next five years.8 You consider three
basic alternatives: methadone maintenance, law enforcement pressure,
and drug education. Potential variants for each one have to do with the
funding sources, in that state, federal, and county money can be used in
different degrees (although not all mixes of funds available for one
approach are also available for the other two). Variation is also possible
according to who administers the program(s): nonprofit organizations,
county employees, or state employees. Or, you might consider variants of
scale and scope, such as two possible sizes for your methadone program.


7. Often, though not always, the basic element is something like a smart practice—
that is, an intervention strategy that attempts to take advantage of some qualitative
opportunity to create valued change at relatively low cost or risk. See Part III, “‘Smart
(Best) Practices’ Research.”
8. Choosing a numerical target can help to focus energies and can force you to think
about what effects are too small to be worth seeking. But when all increments are of
equal value, choosing a target may be arbitrary and self-defeating.
                                                    T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    2 3




Points on a Continuum as “Alternatives”
Suppose you are asked to recommend changes in, say, the rental rates for
public housing in your city. Theoretically, each penny change in the rent
charged could represent an alternative, but clearly that is a mistaken way
to consider “alternatives.” A better approach is to make this into a two-
step problem. Step one is to establish the upper and the lower limits of
an acceptable range of possibilities, and step two is to choose some point
within that range. Choosing each of these limits is a small policy problem
in itself, complete with criteria, projections, and the like. For instance,
equity might require that the upper limit not be “too high,” meaning
somewhere close to $600 per month, whereas affordability might suggest
a slightly lower upper limit. Cost recovery requirements might suggest a
lower limit of, say, $450 per month. In any case, suppose that at the end
of step one, the acceptable range has been narrowed to $475–$575 per
month. One might almost say that a good move for step two is simply to
take the midpoint of these two limits, $525 per month. But there might
be additional criteria of interest, for example, finding a “reasonable”
increment relative to the current rental rate. If the current rate is $475 per
month, a $50 increment, to $525, could be seen as reasonable, but so
might a $75 increment (especially if rents have not been raised in several
years), which will permit the city’s housing authority to offer some
needed services to residents. At any rate, $25 increments between $450
and $575 seems to be the psychologically “right” set of alternatives—not
too large and not too small for the range of options to be considered.
Thus, in the end, we have narrowed our alternatives down to six, from an
initial array of several thousand.
   This two-step procedure could be useful for a variety of problems
involving near-continuous variables as alternatives, for example, budget
allocations, future dates to begin or to discontinue a service, the number
of people to be accommodated by some project or program, emission
limits for some effluent, fee or fine schedules, or quantity of water to be
released from a reservoir.
   The great majority of social science hypotheses about what might
work to ameliorate a given problem show up in the language of continu-
ous variables, which then need to be transformed by the policy analyst
into policy-compatible discontinuous choices. If, for instance, studies
2 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




show that the price elasticity of a pack of cigarettes is –.4, that tells you
about a continuous relationship (within a certain range) between aggre-
gate cigarettes demanded and the price charged. But if you want to
exploit this fact to raise cigarette taxes so as to discourage smoking, you
need to translate this information into particular numbers, for example,
“Raise the tax $.25 per pack to $1.75.”

Design Policy Alternatives
This handbook assumes throughout that you are working on a problem
of policy choice. However, a special case of policy choice occurs when
you wish to, or have to, design at least one policy alternative to add to the
menu of possibilities. Perhaps you are just not satisfied with the menu of
alternatives that people in the policy environment are already talking
about. Most challenges in “exploiting opportunities,” as opposed to “solv-
ing problems,” also involve designing some relatively fresh or new system
for doing so.
   What is the essence of a design problem? It starts by specifying a pri-
mary objective to be achieved, and by assuming that many different ele-
ments need to be combined into some workable system that would
achieve it. Think, for instance, of an objective like “increase patronage in
our regional mass transit system by 20 percent over the next three years.”
You might approach this design problem in the following way:

    1. The system being designed to meet this objective involves elements
       like (1) quantity of buses and subways, (2) their schedule, (3) tolls
       on local highways, (4) rules about diamond-lane usage, (5) parking
       meter rates, (6) monthly bus pass charges, (7) arrangements between
       transit operators and large traffic-generating institutions for pass
       sales to employees, and (8) no doubt, a host of other elements.
    2. Those elements could be combined in a (sometimes large) variety
       of ways. To complicate matters even further, each element is also in
       need of design analysis.
    3. As hypothetical combinations shift in the mind of the designer—or,
       more likely, in the minds of the group of stakeholders involved in
       the design process—the hypothetical system could also shift the
       relative significance of the varied objectives, including the primary
                                                    T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    2 5




     one that motivated the design effort in the first place. The 20 per-
     cent goal might appear to be too ambitious, given the budget con-
     straints on bus purchases or union resistance to bus driver schedule
     changes. By contrast, newly salient environmental protection goals
     might emerge to strengthen commitment to the 20 percent goal.
  4. The process of combining and recombining elements into different
     versions of a workable system is based largely on trial and error. For
     example, the thought process involved might proceed in this man-
     ner: “Okay, let’s start by seeing how far we can get by discounting
     monthly bus passes. If that’s insufficient, let’s see how much more
     we can get by adding time-of-day pricing. And what if we raise the
     tolls on some of the key highways and choke points? Maybe that
     will be better than tinkering with the pricing of bus service. . . .”

   Is there a way to minimize the thrashing about that often accompanies
this trial-and-error process? And how, if at all, might the Eightfold Path
framework contribute?

Consider targets and budgets. You can eliminate a lot of thrashing by
artificially limiting either the budget you can work with or the target you
wish to achieve. In the preceding example, we discussed a 20 percent
increase-in-ridership goal and worked backward from there to design the
least-cost (in a broad sense) way of getting there. This time, let us take the
opposite tack of assuming a particular budget, as in, “If your agency has
$10 million to spend on emergency preparedness next year, what would
be the most effective way of spending it?” The budget of $10 million is
chosen somewhat arbitrarily, although it is expected to be somewhere
within the realistic range of possibilities. But it has the advantage of focus-
ing your imagination for designing a spending package on something
concrete. If at the end of the analysis, you believe $15 million might be a
more realistic and politically achievable number, then think about what
an extra spending package of $5 million would look like. In any case, it is
not realism so much as analytic focus that you are trying to achieve.

Look around. Take advantage of design efforts made by others before
you. Perhaps the problem you are dealing with is so new or unique that
2 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




you will be the first, or even the only, person to oversee the needed design
work. More likely, though, others have already dealt with this problem. It
pays to see what they have done and to assess their degree of success or
failure. Successful approaches are usually the most helpful, but some-
times you can learn a lot from evident failures, as well.
    Where to look? It may help to observe sister jurisdictions or institutions.
If you are thinking about a problem at the state level, look to other states;
at the city level, to other cities; at the community foundation level, to other
community foundations. Professional associations linking government
officials (such as chief state school officers, district attorneys, or county
welfare directors) often publish materials describing “best practice” in one
or more of their member jurisdictions; even if they do not, a phone call to
the executive offices of the association may produce useful leads.
    When you are looking around, however, you may need to consider
whether the problems in your “target” jurisdiction and the “source” juris-
diction are similar in nature and scale. A city that has nearly solved its
homeless problem with a service-rich mix of supportive housing and
solicitous outreach (e.g., Philadelphia) may or may not be a source of
good ideas for a city with a problem that is four or five times as large per
capita and a physical climate that is very mild and therefore attractive to
homeless people (e.g., San Francisco). You may discover that although the
source’s ideas are very good indeed, they will need to be adapted to the
target jurisdiction’s particular context. (For more on how to deal with this
“extrapolation problem,” see Part III, “‘Smart (Best) Practices’ Research.”)

Start wisely. Your initial step is important, for the design process is some-
what “path dependent.” That is, you may see, or not see, relationships and
possibilities differently depending on when and how in the trial-and-
error process you come upon them. For better or worse, there are several
different ways to choose a first step. Hunch and experience are probably
more important in making this choice than any strictly logical or ana-
lytic guidance of which I am aware. Consider the following possibilities:

    • Start with the least flexible design element. In our mass transit exam-
      ple, you might assume that budget constraints on the purchase of
      new rolling stock foreclose a large number of design options.
                                                  T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    2 7




  • Start with the most “powerful” design element. By powerful, I mean
    that the element, once chosen and its likely value assumed, strongly
    suggests the next most important element to consider. Once those
    two elements are chosen, the rest more or less “naturally” fall into
    place. To do this, you need a realistic theory of cause-and-effect
    that, to some extent, links the various elements. Although a perfect
    theory is probably lacking, some rough guesses can usually suffice.
    In the mass transit case, I would guess that supplying disincentives
    to single-occupancy auto use, in the form of tolls or congestion fees,
    would probably be the best place to begin, the theory being that
    mass transit use depends on making private autos a comparatively
    less desirable mode of transportation. That theory could also sug-
    gest making mass transit more attractive, perhaps by decreasing
    fares. But my own hunch is to start with disincentives to auto use,
    which I suspect would be more powerful than making mass transit
    marginally more attractive. Of course, on inspection, the opportu-
    nities for increasing the costs of auto use in targeted routes might
    be too few to make much difference.
  • Start with the most robust element. Since there is always a possibility
    that the complete, and ideal, system will never come into being—
    politics and budgets being volatile and uncertain—it might be a
    good idea to put something in place that would be socially valuable
    all by itself. This might, for instance, be some sort of limited set of
    elements (a subsystem, one might say) involving discounted bus
    passes for employees of large traffic generators.
  • Start with the most transitory, and least costly, element. I am thinking
    here of grant-in-aid windfalls that typically come from a higher
    level of government and that might, by design or by accident, disap-
    pear in a year or two.

Check your assumptions as you proceed. The trial-and-error process
requires, first, creative imagination and, second, rigorous evaluation of
what creative imagination comes up with. The most commonly applied
evaluative procedure is to generate what are known as “logic models.” This
involves spelling out in some detail, and often with the help of graphic
aids, how the emerging system is supposed to work. Presently, a leading
2 8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




source of ideas about how to do this is the W.W. Kellogg Foundation
“Logic Model Development Guide,” (available online at www.wkkf.org).
The Kellogg Foundation’s approach is to divide the planned program or,
in my language, system into six parts: resources/inputs, activities, outputs,
outcomes, and impact. The modeler is supposed to fill in the details in
each category and to specify the assumed relationships. In general, this
approach assumes a production model, in which services of some kind are
being delivered to a recipient population by a governmental or nonprofit
organization. The model can be applied to nonproduction systems too,
for example, regulatory systems, provided one is creative enough with fill-
ing in the “activities” section, which works as a catch-all for the complex-
ity of relationships among system elements.
   Another, very similar, approach, designed explicitly for service sys-
tems, is “service blueprinting.” It goes somewhat beyond logic models in
that it also asks the modeler to specify assumptions about “offstage” and
back-office support functions.9

Design problems usually have two stages. These stages are (1) design the
system as it is projected to run in its steady state, and (2) plan the strategy
of change that would take us from here to there. The first stage is predomi-
nantly technical; the second, predominantly political and bureaucratic.

Designing a case processing system. Design problems are generally of
two types. One involves the management of “cases,” by which I mean
individuals or other entities (such as firms or communities or lower lev-
els of government) that receive some kind of “treatment.” The treatment
may involve delivery of a subsidy, regulatory imposition of obligations,
or application of some sort of person-changing regime (such as educat-
ing children or getting offenders to “go straight”). The second principal
type of design problem involves operating on a collectivity of some kind
rather than on individual cases—for example, improving traffic flow,
eliminating corruption in the police department, preserving habitat, or
launching a community clean-up campaign.


9. A good source of information about this approach is Bitner, Ostrom, and Morgan
(2008).
                                                    T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    2 9




    The second type is too varied to discuss here, but a program that man-
ages cases fits a rough template. That is, we can lay out a general proce-
dure and list questions that should be asked.
    I use the term program deliberately, to refer to an organized ensemble of
routines. For instance, a program to distribute subsidies has routines for
determining eligibility, calculating the amount to be paid, and detecting
and deterring fraud and abuse. A regulatory program has routines for
enforcing compliance with its rules, including inspection procedures and
formulas for applying sanctions. It may also have routines for adopting
rules, giving technical assistance to regulated parties, and offering forbear-
ance in exchange for more efforts to cooperate. In a person-changing pro-
gram, the routines typically bring the subjects into a setting where change
is to be rewarded, facilitated, induced, or demanded, and where profession-
als apply a whole kit of tools to the change process. Think of schoolchil-
dren, classrooms, and teachers; or of patients, hospitals, and doctors; or of
welfare recipients, training programs, and caseworkers and trainers.
    The logic model and service blueprint approaches can work for these
types of programs, but each approach needs to be amplified to take
account of two design levels, the individual and the population.
Presumably, the analysis has to be done for each of these two levels sepa-
rately. For instance, in a weatherization program, design issues at the
individual case level might involve rules covering eligibility, what sort of
weatherization measures to use in a particular type of dwelling unit,
copayments (if any) that the agency charges the customer, and what sort
of guarantees (if any) to provide the customer regarding performance. At
the population level, another set of design issues intrudes, such as which
type of customers to target, how to allocate weatherization-counselor
time among target groups, whether to manage counselors by geographi-
cal districts or by types of functional expertise, how to handle customer
complaints, and the like.
    In confronting the inevitable design trade-offs at the individual level,
it helps to look at any set of routines from two perspectives: that of the
case manager in the agency and that of the citizen whose case is being
“treated.” It often happens that routines designed to make life easier for
program staff only make life harder for citizens. (“Sorry, we don’t give
advice about that; send in the application and we’ll respond . . . .”)
3 0    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




   It also helps to remember occasionally to go back to basics, to reiterate
to yourself and others the main objective of the program. What social
problem is supposed to be ameliorated? Or what existing program is to
be redesigned to accomplish what objective better? Doing so presents an
opportunity to think also about an often-neglected but very important
design issue of a more instrumental kind: what evidence will you system-
atically collect in the course of normal program operations that can let
program managers know whether they are succeeding? That is, what
tracking and evaluation routines can be designed and put in place?
   Another common set of design issues revolves around making
adjustments—sometimes large, sometimes small—in an existing organi-
zation or interorganizational network, so as to improve performance.
Space precludes discussion here of this vast set of topics, but Appendix C,
“Understanding Public and Nonprofit Institutions,” provides a menu of
questions that any analyst of organizational performance issues ought in
most cases to consider.

A little help from your friends—and enemies, too. In some cases, the
policy analyst works on the design problem more or less alone, like some
brooding master architect. More likely, she does her work in loose or
tight conjunction with other policy professionals who bring to the table
different sorts of expertise (e.g., legal, engineering, fiscal) and who bring
different viewpoints and priorities, as well. In any case, sooner or later,
the design work will be held out for much more public view. Interested
stakeholders, and perhaps more diverse audiences, who have previously
been unaware of the design work going on seemingly behind the scenes,
will see what you’re up to. And they will offer their reactions.
   You will want to use such reactions for two purposes: to improve your
design according to criteria that you and your client—and very likely your
audiences—think are important, including the criterion of political feasi-
bility; and to respond in such a way as to increase the political support (and
decrease the opposition) that may come your way, now or later, on process
grounds alone. I do not discuss here the strategy and tactics involved in
communicating effectively with different audiences or the sequence in
which to do so. I limit discussion to the questions of just how rough or
polished the design should be that you first subject to relatively public
review and comment and how tentatively you should put it forward.
                                                   T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    3 1




   Not surprisingly, a middle ground is best. A very rough and admittedly
tentative design may leave out important points, creating a sort of vacu-
um that outside interests will rush to fill on their own terms. You will then
be forced onto the defensive, as you try to forestall the solution they have
been first to suggest. Moreover, a very rough design may signal that the
design work is at such a preliminary stage that it is not worth the trouble
(or the risk of early-mover vulnerability) for any of the stakeholders to
react at all. On the other hand, an overly polished and seemingly definitive
design may signal to stakeholders that you are not interested in consulting
them. In that case, they may feel that they have no choice but to oppose
your design more vehemently than they otherwise might have done—
unless, of course, they conclude that they have no choice but to get on
board and negotiate for the best terms they can manage.
   Assuming that you have put out a rough-but-not-too-rough design
and elicited a range of fairly thoughtful opinions as a result, you will
need ways to keep in touch with the variety of actors who now expect—
and whom you may wish—to be part of an ongoing, if rather diffuse,
design process. Keeping in touch will require a communications infra-
structure (telephone, fax machine, e-mail, chat room), of course. It will
also require efforts on your part to develop the sort of network rela-
tionships that permit rapid and reasonably trustworthy interpersonal
communications.
   At a more analytic level—because any design must be anchored in
working assumptions about its objectives, available resources, and
constraints—you should choose your assumptions with an eye to their
reasonableness as “a basis for further discussion.” You may feel some
discomfort at putting forward such assumptions because they are hypo-
thetical or speculative, and because critics might therefore challenge
them as “lacking in rigor.” Policy analysis is not just an exercise in truth-
telling, however. It is a pragmatic and responsible effort to facilitate
reasonable discourse about a policy future that is inherently uncertain.

STEP FOUR: SELECT THE CRITERIA
It helps to think of any policy story (see Step Eight) as having two inter-
connected but separable plotlines, the analytic and the evaluative. The
first is all about facts and disinterested projections of consequences,
whereas the second is all about value judgments. Ideally, all analytically
 3 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




 sophisticated and open-minded persons can agree, more or less, on the
 rights and wrongs in the analytic plotline and on the nature of its
 residual uncertainties. But this is not true with regard to the evaluative
 plotline—where we expect subjectivity and social philosophy to have
 freer play. The analytic plotline will reason about whether X, Y, or Z is
 likely to happen, but it is in the evaluative plotline that we learn whether
 we think X or Y or Z is good or bad for the world.
    This fourth step in the Eightfold Path belongs primarily, though not
 exclusively, to the evaluative plotline. It is the most important step for
 introducing values and philosophy into the policy analysis, because
 some possible “criteria” are evaluative standards used to judge the good-
 ness of the projected policy outcomes that are associated with each of
 the alternatives.
    Of course, the most important evaluative criterion is whether or not
 the projected outcome will solve the policy problem to an acceptable
 degree. But this is only the beginning. After all, any course of action is
 likely to affect the world in many ways, some desired and some not. Each
 of those effects—or projected outcomes, to apply our Eightfold Path
 language—requires a judgment on our part as to whether or not and why
 it is thought desirable. Our set of criteria embodies such judgments.
 Because any significant impact cries out for such a judgment to be made,
 the greater the variety of significant impacts, the richer will be the set of
 evaluative criteria needed to deal with them.

Semantic Tip Evaluative criteria are not used to judge the alternatives, or
 at least not directly. They are to be applied to the projected outcomes. It
 is easy to get confused about this point—and to get the analysis very
 tangled as a result. This confusion is encouraged by a commonsense way
 of speaking: “Alternative A looks to be the best; therefore, let’s proceed
 with it.” But this phrasing ignores a very important step. The complete
 formulation is “Alternative A will very probably lead to Outcome OA,
 which we judge to be the best of the possible outcomes; therefore, we
 judge Alternative A to be the best.” Applying criteria to the evaluation of
 outcomes and not of alternatives makes it possible to remember that we
 might like OA a great deal even if, because we lack sufficient confidence
 that A will actually lead to OA, we decide not to choose Alternative A after
                                                     T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    3 3




all. With that judgment on the table, it will be possible to look for other
alternatives with a greater likelihood of producing OA.

Commonly Used Evaluative Criteria
Efficiency. Typically, the efficiency criterion is the most important evalu-
ative consideration in cost-effectiveness and benefit-cost studies. I use
efficiency more or less as the term is used in economics, for maximizing
the aggregate of individuals’ welfare as that welfare would be construed
by the individuals themselves—in economic jargon, “Maximize the sum
of individual utilities,” or “Maximize net benefits.” Another roughly
equivalent formulation would be “Maximize the public interest.”
    Although efficiency has an antiseptic, technocratic, and elitist ring to it,
the insistence here that “utilities” are to be assessed according to individ-
ual citizens’ construction of their own welfare is thoroughly democratic.
Indeed, siding with efficiency—on average, across most policy issues and
policy decisions—is a way to produce more humanistic policy results, too.
The reason is not that efficiency is so very humane a concept in itself, but
that policy decisions failing to consider efficiency very often fail to take
account of the welfare of the little guy at all. The little guy may be little,
but in a proper efficiency analysis, he at least shows up to be counted.
Efficiency analysis imposes a moral check (for whatever that is worth in
the real world of politics) on political visionaries eager to relocate entire
populations so as to make room for dams, and on special interests eager
to impose seemingly small price increases on large numbers of consumers
through protectionist measures in order to maintain the incomes of a
relatively small number of producers.
    We should observe, though, that from the point of view of social jus-
tice, the efficiency criterion may be somewhat limited. First, because
analysts typically estimate people’s “utility” by inferring their willingness
to pay for some benefit (or to be spared some deprivation), individuals
with less money do not, in an analytic sense, have as much clout as those
with more. Just how big a limitation this analytic anti-egalitarianism
turns out to be will depend on particular cases, however. Second, if the
values at stake have few or no human defenders, and therefore no human
pocketbooks to back an estimate of willingness to pay, the efficiency cri-
terion may underestimate these values even if by some conception of
3 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




justice they ought to be weighted heavily. In theory, ecological values are
the main example, although in fact some ecological values do have
human defenders who derive enormous utility from preserving them—a
utility that would be accounted for in a proper efficiency analysis.
   Although cost-effectiveness analysis and benefit-cost analysis sound
alike and are frequent traveling companions, they are not the same, and
their uses can be quite different. True, both construe the policy problem
as involving some production relationship between resources and
objective(s). And both entail thinking about the relationship by using an
economizing lens. However, cost-effectiveness analysis is usually satisfied
to assess only the nature and quantity of the desired outputs, whereas
benefit-cost analysis goes a further step and tries to estimate a value for
those outputs in some fashion, typically in terms of money or (rarely)
actual utility. Because it is less ambitious, the cost-effectiveness approach
is more common in policy analysis than is the benefit-cost approach.
Indeed, a surprisingly large number of policy issues can be simplified and
stylized as cost-effectiveness problems, even though on the surface they
may not appear to be likely candidates at all for this sort of treatment.
Here are two examples:

    • The Mudville mayor wishes to respond to business complaints that
      building permits “take forever” to obtain. Given that you can spend no
      more than $500 and are permitted to change the work flow in the city
      planning office but not personnel assignments, the cost-effectiveness
      framework might suggest minimizing delay (measured in days) aris-
      ing from purely procedural and bureaucratic sources.
    • Quake City must upgrade the seismic safety of several thousand
      buildings constructed of unreinforced masonry. You have a twenty-
      year time span and no immediate budget constraint, but you wish
      to accomplish the job with minimum disruption to the lives (and
      incomes) of the residents and small businesses that may be dis-
      placed temporarily by the building renovation process. To mini-
      mize such disruption, cost-effectiveness analysis might lead you to
      propose that the work be done in one season rather than another,
      or that not all grocery stores be closed at once, or that tenants be
      assisted in organizing mutual-aid groups.
                                                    T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    3 5




   Relative to the benefit-cost approach, a cost-effectiveness framework
typically simplifies policy analysis in another useful way, as well: it
assumes as fixed either resources or outputs, and focuses only on choices
involving the other member of this pair. Fixed resources usually involve a
money budget or a human or physical asset such as a work team or a set
of hospital beds. A fixed output is generally a target of some kind, such as
a minimum required pollution abatement level or a maximum acceptable
proportion of children failing an achievement test. Analysis then involves
finding the best means to manipulate the other member of the cost-
effectiveness pair so as to improve productive efficiency. Colloquially, if
resources are fixed, you are “getting the biggest bang for the buck,” or if
you have a fixed target, you may be “doing no worse with less.”
   Now suppose that, once you have figured out some approach where-
by you can do no worse with less, you want to broaden your inquiry to
explore whether you can make use of this new and better approach to
produce a little more than you had originally planned. That is, instead
of assuming that either resources or outputs are fixed, you are prepared
to allow the scale of the activity to increase. The analytic challenge is
much more difficult now, because at this point you cannot avoid the
question of whether the augmented output “is worth it,” given the envi-
sioned cost increment. That question cannot be answered unless you
compare the utilities of both the cost increment and the augmented
output. That is, cost-effectiveness analysis must now rise to the level of
benefit-cost analysis.
   Here is an example of a 1995 RAND Corporation cost-effectiveness
analysis—concerning crime prevention strategies aimed at juveniles—
that tried, rather convincingly, to stretch its way into a benefit-cost analy-
sis without quite admitting it. The study compared the cost-effectiveness
of four “early intervention” strategies to that of incarceration under
California’s “three-strikes” law and found that at least two of them were
very likely superior. It then reasoned:

     It might be inferred from California’s vote in favor of the three-
     strikes law that the public believes a 21 percent reduction in
     crime [RAND’s estimate from an earlier study] is worth the
     measure’s cost of $5.5 billion a year. For less than an additional
3 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




        billion dollars, graduation incentives and parent training could
        roughly double that crime reduction, if they are as effective as
        our analysis suggests.10

Equality, equity, fairness, justice. There are, of course, a great many dif-
ferent, and often opposed, ideas about what these terms do, or should,
mean. In addition to thinking hard about these ideas yourself, sometimes
you should also take your audience through some of that thinking, as in
the following examples:

    • Drivers who do not carry liability insurance leave persons whom
      they injure in auto accidents at risk of being undercompensated.
      Many of those who “go bare” are relatively poor. Many other drivers
      purchase their own insurance against exactly this risk (“uninsured-
      motorist coverage”). A policy proposal to pay for all drivers’ liabil-
      ity insurance out of a fund created by surcharges at the fuel pump
      was denounced by some observers as “inequitable” to the poor, who
      were going bare of insurance. Other observers said that those who
      go bare impose inequitable premium expenses or risks of under-
      compensation on the rest of society, including many individuals
      who are themselves poor or not very well off. Clearly, the analyst
      needs to include a discussion of the idea of equity.
    • The current debate over whether to retain affirmative action prefer-
      ences for African Americans and certain other minorities in univer-
      sity admissions is sometimes said to pit fairness to individuals
      against justice to social groups. This is odd, though, since some
      philosophers—and most ordinary folk, too—suppose that no sys-
      tem claiming to be just could contain any features deemed unfair.
      Again, the analyst has a job to do in sorting out ideas and language.

Freedom, community, and other ideas. To stimulate thought, here is a (far
from complete) list of more ideas of possible relevance as evaluative crite-
ria: free markets, economic freedom, capitalism, “freedom from govern-
ment control,” equality before the law, equality of opportunity, equality of

10. See Greenwood et al. 1995.
                                                      T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    3 7




result, free speech, religious freedom, privacy, safety (especially from
chemicals, various environmental hazards, and the like), neighborliness,
community, sense of belonging, order, security, absence of fear, traditional
family structure, egalitarian family structure, empowerment of workers,
maintenance of a viable nonprofit sector, voluntarism, and trust in others.

Process values. American democracy values process and procedure—
that is, having a say in policy issues that affect you, rationality, openness
and accessibility, transparency, fairness, nonarbitrariness—as well as
substance. These considerations probably apply to the very design or
decision process for which you are doing your present analytic work.
Therefore, remember to consult broadly and equitably. In addition to
building up legitimacy for your work, you may be surprised at how much
you can learn, especially from people who are very unlike yourself social-
ly or ideologically. This does not, of course, mean that you should in the
end accord equal deference to all opinions or desires, or keep the consul-
tative process open forever. Some opinions are more creditable than oth-
ers, and at some point consultation must give way to decision.
   Do not make the mistake of thinking that “more participation” or
“greater access to the process” necessarily equates to “more democratic”
or “more rational.” Greater opportunities for participation may be
exploited more heavily by those with more time to participate or by those
with special interests to protect or by ideological zealots. Ordinary people
and their ordinary concerns can come out as relative losers.

Weighting Conflicting Evaluative Criteria
As we saw in the case of defining the problem, when values are at issue—
as they are in regard to criterion selection, as well—we must reckon how
to weight opposing values. There are three general approaches to this
problem.

The political process takes care of it. One approach is simply to allow exist-
ing governmental and political processes to determine the weighting.
Typically, this approach will accord primacy to the analyst’s employer or
client, as well as allowing derivative influence to be exercised by those parties
in the relevant arena who are in turn important to the employer or client.
3 8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




The analyst imposes a solution. A second approach is for the analyst
herself to modify—though not replace—the weighting assigned by the
employer or client by reference to some overarching philosophical or
political conception. The justification usually offered for this approach is
that because certain interests, and perhaps philosophies, are typically
“underrepresented” in government and politics, and because the analyst
is in a better position than most other participants in the process to see
or understand or appreciate this problem of underrepresentation, the
analyst is duty-bound, or at least permitted, in the name of fairness and
democracy, to right the balance.
    For instance, some observers would argue that were it not for policy
analysts, efficiency-related criteria would rarely be heeded and that, as a
consequence, analysts should in effect speak up for the taxpayers whose
interests may be squeezed out by better-organized advocacy groups. A
related argument is sometimes made that certain conceptions of equity—
in particular those having to do with the idea that the beneficiaries of
publicly provided goods or services should pay for them—are underrep-
resented except among policy analysts. (These conceptions of equity
typically exclude public expenditures deliberately intended to redistrib-
ute wealth among citizens.) Other interests that people sometimes claim
are underrepresented and therefore need representation by analysts are
future generations, children, people who live outside the jurisdiction
making the decisions, ethnic and racial minorities, women, the poor,
consumers, and animals and plants (ecological entities).
    A variant of this approach introduces the idea of an educational pro-
cess. Depending on circumstances, the analyst might encourage influen-
tial political actors—perhaps including the analyst’s boss or principal
client—to rethink their existing criteria in the light of facts or argu-
ments the analyst can draw to their attention. In this case, the analyst
takes responsibility for opening up a dialogue, and perhaps for trying to
infuse it with reason and insight, but then allows the political process to
take over.

The distribution of “rights” precludes some solutions and forwards
others. If X has a recognized property “right,” you can’t easily override
it just because your policy solution would find that convenient; and if
                                                   T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    3 9




Y has a “right” to privacy, you might be inclined to tilt the weighting of
criteria heavily in that direction. Generally, claims based on rights are a
reasonable guide to choosing “better” policies, and rights-based criteria
deserve some extra weighting. However, plenty of exceptions exist, and
it pays to examine, briefly, the whole matter of where rights come from
and how policy analysis can make good use of them. This is a contro-
versial matter, of course, and my thoughts on the matter are certainly
contestable.
   Typically, rights are specially protected claims of an individual or a
group against encroachment by “others,” including society as a whole,
though in some cases it is society that claims the rights against compo-
nent groups or individuals. Sometimes rights are long-standing, well
established, consensual, and, within our social context, unquestioned, as
in “X has a right to be treated with dignity, irrespective of X’s economic
condition.” In these cases, the pattern of rights claims, hedged and lim-
ited though they might be, very likely is found to be a good self-help tool
for organizing the many and varied interactions in a complex society. But
rights are sometimes more emergent than established, and claims based
on rights can be quite contentious or in conflict: “I have a right to use my
cell phone in any place, private or public” versus “I have a right not to be
disturbed by your loud and obnoxious cell phone conversation, thank
you very much.”
   It is best to think of all rights claims as emerging from a social process
of trial-and-error and contestation, with the ones that seem obviously
legitimate to us being merely the (so-far) best established and (probably)
most socially beneficial. Claims that particular rights are justified by
nature or “divine will” or reason or “our common humanity” are simply
rhetoric, because these justifications are always challenged by others.
Over the centuries through which these debates have continued, no per-
manent resolution has occurred, and I think will never occur, since
“rights” are simply convenient tools of social organization and rights-
based claims, a consensually accepted way of negotiating the changing
landscape of whose interests should be protected to what degree and with
what exceptions.
   From the point of view of a hypothetical social engineer trying to
improve social welfare, some rights should certainly be treated as relatively
4 0    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




fundamental. If the moral realm were the legal realm, these rights would
be considered constitutional. But, like the Constitution, even fundamen-
tal rights, such as “the right to privacy” or “the right to control your own
body,” should evolve to fit new social and technological conditions.
Technological change raises questions of privacy and transparency (e.g.,
confidentiality and fairness), and the past structure of rights is not neces-
sarily a good guide to how to redesign that structure for the emergent
situation. A fortiori, this applies to matters of lesser moment—where it
is easier to see that rights are constructed rather than found. Forcing oth-
ers to listen to your cell phone conversation may or may not be a right we
wish to create and honor, but it is surely novel, and needs to be settled by
reference not to reason and the like but rather to the balancing of utilities
in a strictly pragmatic fashion. The same applies to compensation for
takings, decent health care, privacy, abortion, and a host of other matters
that now or in the recent past have been subject to debate over who ought
to have what sort of highly protected positions that we dignify and crys-
tallize as rights.
    Please do not misunderstand this as an argument in favor of relativ-
ism, which in many people’s usage is the same as saying that there is no
choosing among different rights claims, that one is as good as another.
That is not true. Certainly, allowing people to claim a high level of
protection for (i.e., a right to) certain values—such as individual
autonomy—is beneficial to the running of a modern democratic soci-
ety. But this right sometimes needs to have exceptions carved out of it
to accommodate cases when the exercise of this right imposes exces-
sively on other people. The fine texture of the fabric of such rights is
always subject to discussion, and the basis for making these decisions is
not to be found in rhetoric or in philosophical speculation but in the
analysis of alternative fabrics, each taken as a whole and including all
the internal tensions that are bound to be included in them. The evolu-
tion of rights in the moral realm—that is, in the realm of private prac-
tice and thence public opinion formation—involves the sort of con-
stant tinkering and adjustment we see in the realm of both statutory
and judge-made law.
    In the end, therefore, claims to weight criteria by reference to which
rights ought or ought not to take priority deserve to be treated critically.
                                                           T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    4 1




Semantic Tip Note, however, that rights alleged to be “natural” or
“human” are conceptually quite different from legal rights, despite the
semantic similarity. Examples are the conflicting abortion stances predi-
cated on right-to-life values or a woman’s right to control her own body.
Alleged natural or human rights are sometimes controversial in that
some people would like to have them recognized as legal prescriptions
whereas others would oppose such recognition.

Commonly Used Practical Criteria
Not all criteria that come into play in an analysis are part of the evaluative
plotline. Some are purely practical and are part of the analytic plotline.
These criteria have to do with what happens to an alternative as it moves
through the policy adoption and policy implementation processes.11 The
main ones are legality, political acceptability, robustness under conditions
of administrative implementation, and improvability.

Legality. A feasible policy must not violate constitutional, statutory, or
common law rights. Remember, however, that legal rights are constantly
changing and are often ambiguous. It is sometimes worth taking a gam-
ble on a policy that might—or might not—be adjudged illegal when
tested in court. (In such cases, advice of counsel is clearly in order to help
craft the policy so that its survival chances are enhanced.)

Political acceptability. A feasible policy must be politically acceptable, or
at least not unacceptable. Political unacceptability is a combination of two
conditions: too much opposition (which may be wide or intense or both)
and/or too little support (which may be insufficiently broad or insuffi-
ciently intense or both).
    Do not take a static view of unacceptability, however. Always ask your-
self the question “If my favorite policy solution doesn’t look acceptable
under current conditions, what would it take to change those conditions?”


11. I said earlier that criteria apply to outcomes and not to alternatives. However, this
statement needs a slight amendment in the case of practical criteria, which apply not
to outcomes but to the prospects an alternative faces as it goes through the policy
adoption and implementation processes.
4 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




You may discover that creative political strategizing can open up options
that haven’t been seriously considered before. (Discussion of techniques
for building coalitions and launching successful campaigns is far beyond
the scope of this book, but Appendix D, “Strategic Advice on the Dynamics
of Political Support,” sketches some of the basics.)
   In assessing strategic limitations and possibilities, it will help to make
use of various models of the political process. As I observed earlier, mod-
els are based on metaphors, and the ones that are likely to be most valu-
able, in this case are these:

    • A complex game in which well-organized and well-positioned
      minorities enjoy special advantages
    • A theater, in which the actors are elected officials who strive, with
      or without a basis in reality, to create a good appearance—to them-
      selves, to each other, to the critics, and to the audience (whose
      approval, ultimately, is all-important)
    • A marketplace of slogans, symbols, and ideas, with a mix of honor-
      able merchants and hucksters as sellers and a mix of sophisticates
      and innocents as buyers
    • A school in which elected officials learn how to do good policy
      design work and sometimes share their results and their methods
      with their classmates

How exactly is one to make use of such models? Think of them as concep-
tual lenses. Observe the relevant political process through each of them in
turn, and identify the probable pitfalls and opportunities brought into
focus by each.12

Robustness and improvability. Policy ideas that sound great in theory
often fail under conditions of field implementation. The implementation
process has a life of its own. It is acted out through large and inflexible
administrative systems and is distorted by bureaucratic interests. Policies
that emerge in practice can diverge, even substantially, from policies as
designed and adopted. A policy alternative, therefore, should be robust

12. An analogous procedure was first given prominence by Graham Allison (1971).
                                                          T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    4 3




enough that even if the implementation process does not go very smoothly,
the policy outcomes will still prove to be satisfactory.13
   Some adverse implementation outcomes usually worth worrying
about are long delays; capture of program or policy benefits by a rela-
tively undeserving and unintended constituency; excessive budgetary or
administrative costs; scandal from fraud, waste, and abuse that under-
mines political support and embarrasses supporters; and administrative
complexities that leave citizens (and program managers) uncertain as to
what benefits are available or what regulations must be complied with.
   Even the best policy planners cannot get all the details right at the
design stage. They should therefore allow room for policy implementers
to improve on the original design. The most common vehicle for such
improvement is participation in the implementation process by indi-
viduals and groups whose expertise or point of view was not included in
the design phase. However, the openness that makes for improvability
can also, by opening the door to hostile political interests, diminish
robustness. Hence, a careful evaluation of the current factual situation—
personalities, institutional demands and incentives, political vulnerabili-
ties, and so on—is usually in order.
   In estimating robustness and improvability, models of bureaucracy
can serve as useful conceptual lenses, as suggested earlier with regard to
carrying out political analysis. I find the most useful metaphors for
bureaucracy to be these, listed in no particular order:

   • An automaton enacting preprogrammed routines (“standard oper-
     ating procedures,” or “SOPs”)
   • A person in an environment, driven by survival needs, self-
     enhancement interests, and, under some conditions, a desire for
     self-actualization
   • A political arena wherein individuals and factions jockey for influ-
     ence over the organization’s mission, access to its decision systems,
     and its prerequisites

13. Robustness under conditions of “deep uncertainty” is sometimes a preeminently
important criterion—for example, for long-term and very risky problems such as
global climate change or shifts in the technical and organizational capacity of terror-
ist movements and cells (Lempert, Popper, and Bankes 2003).
4 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




    • A tribe with its own rituals and an array of safeguards against con-
      tamination by “outsiders”
    • A society of individuals cooperating toward a more-or-less common
      set of goals
    • A structure of roles and interrelationships that are intended to
      complement one another in a rational division of labor
    • An instrument used by “society” for society’s own objectives

“Criteria” as Logical Constructs
Criteria such as efficiency, equity, political acceptability, and robustness
are substantive. But we can think of criteria of a purely formal sort, as
well. For instance, we can distinguish among criterion values that we
wish to maximize, those that must be minimally satisfied, and those of a
generally lesser priority for which “more is better.”
   It is helpful to focus initially on one primary criterion, a principal
objective to be maximized (or minimized). Typically, this principal
objective will be the obverse of your problem definition. For instance,
if your problem is that too many families are homeless, then your
principal objective will probably be to minimize the number of home-
less families. If the problem is that global temperatures are rising too
rapidly, a good statement of a principal objective might be, “Minimize
or reverse the increase of global temperatures.” Naturally, there are
other criteria to judge outcomes by, such as costliness, political accept-
ability, and economic justice, and these should all enter into the final
evaluation. However, unless you focus—initially, at least—on a single
primary criterion and array others around it, you will likely find your-
self getting very confused. As you get deeper into the analysis and feel
more comfortable with a multiplicity of important objectives, you
may wish to drop your emphasis on a primary criterion and work on
a more complex “objective function,” in the language of mathematical
programming.

Linear programming. A mathematical (and now computer-accessible)
technique for optimizing choice when you have a principal objective or
an objective function and a scarce stock of resources for maximizing it
                                                   T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    4 5




is called “linear programming.”14 Often, at least some of the resources—
such as the agency budget and the available physical facilities promised
by a nonprofit agency—are constrained. Even if the problem is not sub-
ject to simple quantitative assessment, analysts often find it useful to
take advantage of the logical structure of linear programming to con-
ceptualize their task. The conventional formulation then sounds like
this: maximize this objective (or objective function) subject to such-
and-such resource constraints.
    Here is an example from the homelessness problem: “maximize the
number of homeless individuals housed on any given night, subject to
the constraints of not exceeding $50,000 per night total budgetary cost to
Agency X, not putting shelters into Neighborhoods A and B for political
reasons, and trying to give ‘more’ choice to the beneficiary population as
to where they will take shelter.”

Semantic Tip Linguistic clarity. If it is possible to sort your criteria
according to whether they refer to values to be maximized, values that
stand as constraints, or values that have a more-is-better quality, keep the
different statuses of the criteria in mind. Be conscious of them. You can
do this with a simple verbal trick: as appropriate, define your criteria as
“maximize such-and-such value,” “satisfy such-and-such value constraint,”
or “get more of such-and-such value.” If your criterion label contains no
signal as to the better direction to move in, as in “governance structure” or
“effect on landlords,” it is almost certainly insufficient.
   In any case, to the extent possible the criteria should be characterized
both in conceptual and in operational (typically quantitative) terms.
Conceptually, for instance, one talks about “maximizing the reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions from publicly owned buildings,” whereas opera-
tionally, one talks about “Minimizing the tons of greenhouse gas emissions
per month from publicly owned buildings.” In this case, the operational
definition is a close proxy for the more qualitative conceptual definition.
Frequently, however, something of a gap exists, since what is measurable
may only imperfectly reflect the conceptual characterization. For


14. See Stokey and Zeckhauser (1978, chap. 11).
 4 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




 instance, minimizing “the hassle factor” to the citizen in recycling his
 garbage is conceptually meaningful but hard to express quantitatively. It
 is really about the psychology of effort, the degree of belief in the desir-
 ability of the goal, and the degree of frustration involved in preparing
 one’s garbage for pickup. In this case, the best you could probably man-
 age operationally would be to estimate the number of minutes the citi-
 zen spends per week to cooperate in the enterprise.
     To the extent possible, group your criteria in such a way that all the
 “positive” (benefit) criteria are clustered separately from the “negative”
 (typically, cost plus avoidance of negative unintended consequences)
 criteria. In a logical sense, how one does this does not really matter. But
 it makes for easier reading and discussion. It is a little like arranging your
 bridge hand by suit and, within suits, by number sequence.
     Don’t embrace euphemisms or other dodges as a substitute for words
 that describe harsh realities. The client for one student project asked for
 advice on what adult school programs to cut in order to save money in
 financially desperate circumstances. The students initially put together a
 brief defending adult school programming in general, at best leaving to
 inference what elements of the bundle were most deserving of cuts.

 Avoid Confusing Alternatives and Criteria
Semantic Tip Alternatives are courses of action, whereas criteria are men-
 tal standards for evaluating the results of action. How could you ever
 mistake an alternative for a criterion, or vice versa? As with many
 instances of confusion in policy analysis, the source of such a mistake is
 likely to be semantic. Consider, for example, a senior manager in a state
 regulatory agency dealing with worker safety. She wishes to incorporate
 worker complaints into the agency’s strategy for targeting inspections
 across work sites in the state. Her assistant presents her with a number of
 alternatives for doing so, one of which is called “Rapid-response (twenty-
 four-hour maximum) hotline.” Not surprisingly, one of the criteria for
 assessing outcomes is “responsiveness.” The alternative therefore seems a
 lot like the criterion. But this is an illusion. The alternative (course of
 action) is really the hotline. The main reason it looks like a criterion is
 that the intention of “rapid-response” has crept into the definition of the
                                                          T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    4 7




alternative.15 This is a dangerous mistake, because one should not
assume through definition that an intention, as expressed in the verbal
characterization of the alternative, will actually be realized.
   This sort of confusion is most likely to arise when the internal activi-
ties of an organization are under discussion, since proposals to create or
modify organizational units resonate with intentionality. Consider a pro-
posal to create a performance measurement office, a strategic planning
team, and a customer service department. The performance measure-
ment office may end up, for whatever reasons, using meaningless mea-
sures collected by unreliable agents; the strategic planning team may be
deliberately ignored by savvy or possibly unsavvy managers; and the cus-
tomer service department may unintentionally end up as an instrument
of customer alienation. I once questioned a student’s proposal to create a
“drug counseling service” for employees within an organization. The
proposal seemed to me too weak to make a dent in the organization’s
problem. The student countered, “No, I’m not talking about any old
counseling service that might attack this problem, but an ‘effective’ one.”
Nothing in the student’s account of how the service was to work increased
the odds that it might really be effective. Effectiveness was assumed sim-
ply because the student wished to assume it.

STEP FIVE: PROJECT THE OUTCOMES
For each of the alternatives on your current list, project all the outcomes
(or impacts) that you or other interested parties might reasonably care
about. This is the hardest step in the Eightfold Path. Even veteran policy
analysts do not usually do it very well. Not surprisingly, analysts often
duck it entirely, disguising their omission by a variety of subterfuges.
Hence, the most important advice about this step is simple: do it.
   At least three great practical as well as psychological difficulties must
be confronted here. First, “policy” is about the future, not about the past
or the present, but we can never be certain about how the future will
unfold, even if we engage it with the best of intentions and the most
thoughtful of policy designs.

15. Also, in this case, the stem respons- appears in both alternative and criterion.
4 8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




    Second, “project the outcomes” is another way of saying, “Be realistic.”
Yet realism is often uncomfortable. Most people prefer optimism. Policy
can affect people’s lives, fortunes, and sacred honor, for better or for
worse. Making policy, therefore, imposes a moral burden heavier than
many people care to acknowledge. Understandably, we would rather
believe that our preferred or recommended policy alternative will accom-
plish what we hope and that it will impose fewer costs than we might
realistically fear.
    Third, there is what is sometimes called “the 51–49 principle.” That
is, in the thick of the policy fray, we are driven out of pure self-defense
to treat 51 percent confidence in our projection as though it deserved
100 percent confidence, so that we sometimes mislead not only others
but ourselves as well. The first difficulty—namely, that we can never have
wholly convincing evidence about the future—compounds the second
and third, inasmuch as our wishful thinking is not readily disciplined by
reference to empirical demonstrations and proofs.
    These psychological difficulties notwithstanding, systematic efforts to
project outcomes are essential. For policymakers in a modern democracy,
neither following gut instincts nor reading pigeon entrails is a responsible
alternative.

Extend the Logic of Projection
In this section I discuss, in a very general way, the logic of combining
models and evidence to produce usable projections of policy outcomes
from the various alternatives being considered. The logic is largely that of
common sense but with some important additions.
   The first addition is that of metaphor. Policy analysis, as we have seen,
makes use of the metaphors behind the models—metaphors such as
“bureaucracy as automaton” and “politics as theater” and “this piece of
the world as production system”—to yield qualitative insights about
important causal relationships. The especially important relationships
are those that may afford useful intervention points in complex systems
or that present potential pitfalls in the policy adoption or implementa-
tion process.
   Second, policy analysis uses social science to the degree that it can. A
great deal of social science is directed toward answering the question “Is
                                                  T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    4 9




Model X of this piece of the world realistic?” Social scientific studies of
this type can often be useful for diagnosing the existence of problems,
mapping trends, and deciding whether some seemingly “smart” practice
(see Part III) is worth trying to replicate. You should be careful, however,
to avoid using the social scientific standard of adequacy for judgments
about the realism of a model, for it is quite conservative. In policy analy-
sis the looser, but more appropriate, standard should be whether reliance
on a model can lead to better results and avoid worse results than less
disciplined guesswork.
    Third, policy analysis, as we have seen, uses multiple models. Most
social science, in imitation of the hard sciences, looks for the “best”
model (or, in the case of some practitioners, the “true” model). Because
all models abstract from reality, however, even the best models are never
complete. Although such abstraction may advance the progress of sci-
ence, in the world of policy, where real consequences of policy choices are
to be experienced by real people, no facet of a problem or the possible
alternatives to be adopted can be exempted from analysis. Whatever
models can be employed to illuminate some important facet of the prob-
lem or of the possible outcomes should be employed—even if doing so
results in an inelegant and ad hoc multiplication of subanalyses.
    Finally, even when you have adopted adequately realistic models of
sufficient number and variety, these models still need to be used in con-
junction with evidence about “initial conditions,” or the facts on the
ground as they currently exist. For instance, “Deputy Director Smith is
as incompetent as they come. The need to work around her will raise the
risks of failure by at least 25 percent.” Or: “The community appears very
angry about the drug scene right now, and they’ll almost certainly help
the police in the planned crackdown.” Although the projections of many
models are not particularly sensitive to initial conditions, some are.
These are the models that bear on projections of political acceptability
and on the robustness of an alternative to the stresses of the implemen-
tation process.

Magnitude Estimates
Projecting outcomes often requires you to think not just about the gen-
eral direction of an outcome but about its magnitude, as well. Typically
5 0    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




it’s not enough to say, “We expect this program to have a very positive
effect on reducing unwanted teenage pregnancies.” Instead, you’d want to
say, “We expect this program to reduce by 100 to 300 the number of
unwanted teenage pregnancies per year in this community over the next
five years.”
    Sometimes a single point estimate of your best guess about the degree
of magnitude will suffice. But in other cases, you should provide a range.

Break-Even Estimates and the Problem of Uncertainty
“You have no evidence this will work,” carp your critics. You—quite
correctly—respond, “You have no evidence it won’t.” You are both right,
because “evidence” about events that have not yet occurred is a contra-
diction in terms. Nevertheless, your critics make the valid point that you
probably can’t be very certain that your recommended policy option will
work and that the burden of justification (not, of course, a burden of lit-
eral “proof ”) falls on you.16 You will want to take up this burden using
whatever strategic leverage you can muster.
   This means that you will set the bar of justification as low as is reason-
able. Typically, you will want to claim only that the recommended course
of action is “sufficiently likely” to produce results that are good enough
to justify the known costs and risks. This approach is known as “break-
even” or “threshold” analysis. It is an astonishingly powerful—yet simple,
intuitive, and commonsensical—conceptual lens.17 It builds a decision
framework out of what is known or reasonably assumed and handles the
residual uncertainties by comparing them to elements in this more
secure frame.
   Suppose, for instance, that some youth-guidance-oriented policy
meant to reduce incarceration of juveniles is under consideration and
has known costs of $1 million, but the level of effectiveness is specula-
tive. You build a decision frame out of (1) a decision-rule that says, “If
the benefits exceed the costs, do it,” and (2) a known fact about the


16. This assumes that you do make a recommendation. But even if you only lay out
options and attach projected outcomes to them, you still cannot escape justifying the
projections.
17. It is also, I believe, a lens that is inadequately appreciated and utilized.
                                                         T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    5 1




costs, $1 million. You then evaluate the remaining uncertainty in these
four steps:

   1. Locate the point of minimum acceptable effectiveness given the
      costs. Ask: “What is the minimum level of effectiveness this policy
      would have to achieve in order to justify our spending $1 million?”
      Your answer: “Different observers have different opinions about
      how much avoiding an incarceration is worth, but leaving that
      aside and going with my own values, I’d say that a 15 percent
      reduction is the minimum I would accept given the expenditure of
      $1 million.”18
   2. Referring back to your model of the processes that create the
      problem and hold it in place, ask: “What new processes, or chang-
      es in old ones, could conceivably produce this level of effective-
      ness?” This is largely a qualitative analysis. The answer might be:
      “Based on previous documentation of how the guidance process
      works, we can safely say that it works in different ways with differ-
      ent sorts of kids—when it works at all, that is. It can provide
      about half the kids more constructive life choices; in about a
      quarter of the cases it works through heightening the (realistic)
      perception of punishment; and in about a quarter of cases we are
      just crossing our fingers.”
   3. Assess how likely (or unlikely) it is that the processes for improve-
      ment thus identified will actually produce the required—that is, the
      break-even—level of effectiveness. It is particularly helpful to ask
      whether the break-even level (15 percent, in this case) looks like a
      plausible number given what is known or assumed about the effec-
      tiveness in similar circumstances of similar sorts of interventions. If
      the number is implausibly high, you might then go on to ask
      whether special circumstances of some sort might be at work in this
      case to help achieve it. Note that in this and the previous step you

18. Some writers speak of “switchpoint analysis” and would refer to the 15 percent
here as the switchpoint at which a decision maker would switch from a favorable
view of this policy to an unfavorable view or vice versa. Others refer to “threshold
analysis” and would call the 15 percent figure the threshold level of effectiveness we
would need to assume in order to justify choosing this alternative.
5 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




       must rely on what we might think of as “theory,” or self-conscious
       and evidence-based reasoning about the way causal processes work.
       Typically, these are the weakest links in the chain of policy-analytic
       reasoning. That is why it is particularly important—and particu-
       larly difficult—to take this step as thoughtfully, self-critically, and
       responsibly as possible.
    4. Estimate the probability of failure and the political and other costs
       of having to accept failure—asking yourself whether these costs
       would be tolerable should they be incurred.

  In the hope that it may be helpful to encourage readers to use
break-even analysis (when appropriate, of course), I offer two more
examples:

    • Policy X for establishing a chain of wildlife refuges looks like an
      excellent choice to implement a broader conservation agenda, pro-
      vided that the funding comes through as planned. But it might not,
      because federal grant-in-aid resources may not be forthcoming, or
      the governor may give the policy lower priority than she now
      promises, or some development interests that have their eye on two
      of the designated sites may find a way to block it. You interview
      your client, a state environmental agency director, and determine
      that she likes the program so much that she is willing to go for it if
      it has at least a 50-50 chance of working out. Your analysis can then
      focus her attention on why, after considerable research, you have
      concluded that it has a somewhat better (or somewhat worse)
      chance than 50-50, even though you may find it impossible to
      specify exactly how much better (or worse).
    • Building a new stadium for the Hometown Heroes looks like a good
      idea, given the nature of the costs and benefits, if average daily
      attendance turns out to be no less than 10,000. That’s the break-
      even attendance figure for you and the relevant decision makers. It’s
      up to them to decide, first, how confident they are that this break-
      even level will be reached and, then, whether that degree of confi-
      dence is enough to warrant making an affirmative decision. You can
                                                            T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    5 3




       thus organize your presentation of facts and opinions to focus on
       these two key issues.19

Semantic Tip Assuming for the moment that benefits are uncertain while
 costs are not, ask yourself these two questions: (1) “Given what I know
 for sure about the costs of this alternative, what is the minimum help we
 need to get from Condition X to ensure adequately offsetting benefits?”
 and (2) “How reasonable is it to believe that Condition X will actually
 produce that minimum?”

 Try Sensitivity Analysis
 Which uncertainties are the most important, in the sense that relatively
 small changes in what you believe would cause you to change your mind
 about how desirable some alternative might be? By a process known as
 sensitivity analysis, you can discover these most important uncertainties.
 The procedures are somewhat technical (Morgan and Henrion 1990,
 chap. 8), but the intuition behind them is simple. Consider the several
 assumptions you have made on the way to your conclusion and suppose
 that each of them is somewhat mistaken. Now ask yourself: “How big a
 mistake can I afford in this assumption before this analysis is in really big
 trouble?” The smaller the affordable mistake, the more sensitive is your
 analysis to the particular assumption. (For a good example of sensitivity
 analysis, see Appendix A.)
    It is not hard to examine these assumptions one at a time. But what if
 they pile up in such a way that you are “somewhat” wrong on two or
 three or four assumptions all at once? This situation is typically dealt
 with by a technique called “Monte Carlo simulation,” which begins by
 recognizing that each assumption is in itself probabilistic and then com-
 bines the probabilities behind the assumptions to create a new set of

 19. A special case of break-even estimation is a fortiori estimation. If you hypothesize
 worst-case estimates of all important parameters that remain uncertain, and the
 policy alternative still satisfies your decision criterion, the alternative would, a for-
 tiori, prove satisfactory even if more careful estimates were to be more favorable. In
 that case, the more careful estimates are unnecessary. See MacRae and Whittington
 (1997) on a fortiori analysis (pp. 218–219) and, more generally, on the question of
 precision versus approximation in projecting outcomes (pp. 209–224).
5 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




probabilities about how the combination of assumptions will turn out.
You can then say something like this: “Given the many possible scenarios
that might occur, there is an 82 percent chance that the actual scenario
would exceed our break-even requirement.”20
   But suppose that projections must be made for a future beset by mul-
tiple uncertainties, like climate change or the global configuration of
military forces and technologies twenty-five years off, for which proba-
bility distributions are not known or are controversial. One promising
approach makes use of any of an emerging set of computer-assisted pro-
jection techniques, generally known as long-term policy analysis. This
approach is similar to Monte Carlo simulation in that it starts with sce-
narios about alternative futures, but instead it searches for policy choices
that would be “robust,” in the sense that they would not necessarily be the
best but would satisfy the whole, or nearly the whole, array of minimum
policy desiderata. The objective is to minimize the maximum “regret”
that relevant parties might experience.21

Confront the Optimism Problem
Great ventures require optimism. Because even small ventures by govern-
ment can affect so many lives, they are in their own way great. Hence,
some realistic optimism is beneficial. But how do you guard against
excessive optimism?

Scenario writing. What scenarios might cause the proposal to fail to
produce the desired outcome—that is, solving or sufficiently mitigating
the policy problems? Do not create such scenarios from whole cloth; be
realistic. And yet, let your imagination run a little, so that you have a
good chance of thinking of the most dangerous possibilities. In particu-
lar, think about the dangers of the implementation process, political and
otherwise. Scenario writing also benefits from thinking about possible


20. For further details, see Morgan and Henrion (1990, chap. 8). You can use the
commercially available (and very user-friendly) Crystal Ball program to run Monte
Carlo simulations.
21. Most of the work on this type of simulation has been done at the RAND
Corporation. See Lempert, Popper, and Bankes (2003).
                                                 T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    5 5




failures from a vantage point in the future looking backward. Consider
the following scenarios:

   • In a health or safety regulatory program, the scientific or technical
     knowledge necessary to produce rational and legally defensible
     standards may prove to be lacking. As a result, five years from now,
     symbolic politics, corruption, industry capture, or excessive regula-
     tory zeal will have filled the vacuum.
   • Time passes, and budgetary resources and political support that
     were once available slip away under the impact of electoral change
     and shifts in the economy. A terrorist-identification program,
     begun under nurturant leaders and accompanied by editorialists’
     applause, will have become consolidated with another program,
     then taken over by a different bureaucratic unit, and eventually will
     have disappeared.
   • A successful state program designed to furnish technical assistance
     to extremely poor rural counties will have added a mandate to aid
     many not-so-poor urban counties, with the result that scarce pro-
     gram resources will have been dissipated and squandered. (I call
     this scenario “piling on”; see Bardach 1977).
   • A program that subsidizes research and development of “fish pro-
     tein concentrate,” intended as a cheap and nutritious food additive,
     is launched with great fanfare. Five years from now it will have been
     stalled, permanently, by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration,
     which will not have been able to assimilate this product into its
     standard operating procedures for regulatory review.

Semantic Tip Notice that these scenarios are written in the future per-
fect tense. Use of this verb tense encourages concreteness, which is a
helpful stimulant to the imagination (Weick 1979, 195–200). It often
helps your scenario writing to start with a list of adverse implementa-
tion outcomes, conjuring up one or more scenarios about how each of
them might occur. Remember the list of such outcomes embodied in the
scenarios just described: long delays; “capture” of program or policy
benefits by a relatively undeserving and unintended constituency; exces-
sive budgetary or administrative costs; scandal arising from fraud, waste,
5 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




and abuse that undermines political support and embarrasses support-
ers; and administrative complexities that leave citizens (and program
managers) uncertain as to what benefits are available or what regula-
tions must be complied with.

Semantic Tip Undesirable side effects. Analysts are often cautioned to
think about “unanticipated consequences.” But this term is not appropri-
ate, for it is often used to refer to perfectly anticipatable, though undesir-
able, side effects. Here are some common undesirable but foreseeable
side effects in public programs:

    • Moral hazard increases. That is, your policy has the effect of insulat-
      ing people from the consequences of their actions. For example,
      increasing the size of unemployment benefits has the side effect of
      blunting the incentives to search for a replacement job.
    • Reasonable regulation drifts toward overregulation, especially if the
      costs of overregulation are not perceptible to those who bear them.
      One possible adverse result of setting health or safety standards
      “too high” and enforcing them “too uniformly” is that you increase
      private-sector costs beyond some optimal level. For instance, given
      most people’s preferences for safety, imposing auto bumper stan-
      dards that cost some $25 per vehicle, but have only trivial effects on
      improving vehicle crashworthiness, would not pass a conventional
      benefit-cost test.
         A second adverse result of overregulation might be that you inad-
      vertently cause a shift away from the regulated activity into some
      other activity that—perversely—is less safe or less healthful. For
      instance, some observers argue that overregulating the safety fea-
      tures of nuclear power production has caused a shift toward coal,
      which they argue is much more hazardous than nuclear power.
    • Rent-seekers—that is, interests looking out for profitable niches
      protected from full competition—distort the program to serve
      their own interests. It is not inevitable that suppliers of goods and
      services to the government, including civil servants, will find ways
      to capture “rents,” but it often happens (e.g., with many defense
      contractors). Rent-seeking also occurs in less obvious ways—as
                                                   T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    5 7




     when some regulated firms successfully lobby for regulations that
     impose much higher compliance costs on their competitors than
     on themselves.

The ethical costs of optimism. It is hard to overstate the importance of
worrying about the possible adverse side effects of otherwise “good”
policies, not to mention the possibility that even intended main benefits
may fail to materialize under many circumstances (see the chapter on
“Assessing Your Ignorance” in Behn and Vaupel 1982). The ethical policy
analyst always poses the question, “If people actually were to follow my
advice, what might be the costs of my having been wrong, and who
would have to bear them?” Keep in mind that the analyst typically is not
one of the parties who have to bear the costs of her mistakes.

The Emergent-Features Problem
Policy often intervenes in systems of some complexity, systems populated
by actors who adapt to your interventions in surprising ways and whose
adaptations lead other actors to create still further adaptations. Surprising
behavior may emerge from such dynamics. How can you take such pos-
sibilities into account when you make your projections?
    In many cases, you cannot, for the systems are too complex and too
little understood. The macro-economy is an extreme case—the hypo-
thetical responses of producer interests to “supply-side” tax cuts are a
major source of contention between those who think the taxes generated
by a growing economy will substantially offset the direct effects of the
cuts and those who are deeply skeptical of this scenario. Few cases are
that extreme, however, and you might make some progress with what
might be called “the other-guy’s-shoes” heuristic.
    Imagine yourself in the other guy’s shoes. Say to yourself: “If I were X,
how would I act?” And then proceed to crawl into X’s mind and play out,
in your own mind, what X might do. Do this systematically for each of
the important stakeholders or other affected parties. The value of this
exercise is that you will discover them to be adapting in surprising ways
to the new policy situation you may be creating.
    For example, under chemical right-to-know laws, workers must be
told what substances they have been exposed to, and they may examine
5 8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




health records maintained by employers. If you were a worker, how
might you use this law? Might you use the information to quit your pres-
ent job? To demand a higher wage or more protective equipment? To sue
your employer or put pressure on your union representative?
   And how would your union representative react to such pressure?
Might this pressure make the representative’s job harder—or perhaps
easier in some way?
   Now, suppose that you were an employer. Given what you expect your
workers to do, you would face incentives to make adaptations or coun-
termoves. Might you stop keeping all health records not explicitly
required by law? Or continue keeping records but permit doctors to per-
form only selected lab tests? And if you were a worker and saw your
employer doing these things, what countermoves would you make?
   Not all the moves and countermoves of players wearing the other
guy’s shoes will necessarily lead to trouble for the policy alternative you
are evaluating. Many such adaptation sequences may prove to be help-
ful, in the sense that they may help society to adjust to the changes set
in motion by the new policy. At some point in the 1970s, the Federal
Trade Commission (FTC) attacked the problem of retailers evading
implied warranty obligations for defective products by selling install-
ment debts to banks and other collectors that had no duty, under the
so-called holder-in-due-course doctrine, to fix the product or to refrain
from collecting on the installment debt. The FTC solution was, in effect,
to abolish the protections of the holder-in-due-course doctrine. Banks
complained that they did not want to go into the toaster repair business.
But if you put yourself in the shoes of a bank manager suddenly obliged
to become a toaster repairer, might you not have thought of contracting
out your repair obligations to repair specialists, or perhaps arranging
not to buy installment debts from retailers who you believed could not
be relied upon to make good on their implied warranties?

Construct an Outcomes Matrix
The step of projecting outcomes leads you into a dense thicket of infor-
mation. At some point along the way, you will probably need to stand
back and assess complex and uncertain scenarios for perhaps two to five
basic alternatives, combined with their principal variants. A convenient
                                                        T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    5 9




way to get an overview of all this information is to display it in an out-
comes matrix. The typical outcomes matrix format arrays your policy
alternatives down the rows and your evaluative criteria across the col-
umns. Each cell contains the projected outcome of the row alternative as
assessed by reference to the column criterion.
   Table I-1 is an example. It appeared in a report by four of my students
in 2008 that had been requested by the international environmental
group ICLEI–Local Governments for Sustainability.22 They projected
outcomes for eight alternatives (“scenarios,” in their usage) across five
criteria (in three clusters).23 I do not vouch for the accuracy of their pro-
jections, though they tried the best they could to synthesize the diverse
and sometimes contradictory research literature as it existed at the time.
Of greater interest is their attempt to fill in the cells in a canonical matrix
form. The alternatives are listed down the rows and the criteria across the
columns. Three criteria are lumped together under the heading “Viability,”
though if space had permitted, the students might have made a separate
column for each. The analysis applies to a representative U.S. city called
Anytown. Note that the matrix is labeled as a “Comparative Analysis.”
Each projection is compared to a baseline projection for the year 2050,
showing only the difference between the baseline projection and the esti-
mated projection for the indicated alternative. Most cells contain a pro-
jected range rather than a single point estimate. In Step Six, I come back
to Table I-1 and discuss how this comparative setup facilitates confront-
ing the trade-offs.
   An outcomes matrix at this stage of your work is a scratch-pad affair,
useful for you and your team members and perhaps a friendly outsider
or two. Its main function is to help you see what you have in hand and
what you still need to learn about. A secondary function is to prepare to
confront the trade-offs (see Step Six). If the matrix looks to you large
and complicated, you may be encouraged to shrink it: conceptualize
some alternatives as mere variants of more or less the same thing, get
rid of alternatives that are obvious losers, and omit criteria that don’t


22. See Cryan et al. 2008.
23. They grouped their eight alternatives into five sub-groups, however, to simplify
the analysis.
6 0    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




   TABLE I-1


                                      COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS                                   O (Operational)
                                           Anytown, U.S.A                                    E (Economic)
                             (2050 Baseline: 5.5 Million Metric Tons CO2e)                   P (Political)
                                          (% reduction from               (Cost per ton
                                         2050 CO2e baseline)              CO2e abated)
              Policy Scenario                   Efficacy                Cost-effectiveness   Viability
              Mandate efficiency             6.9% to 8.8%                  -$130 to $5       O: High
              retrofits for homes                                                            E: Medium
  EXISTING                                                                                   P: High

 BUILDINGS
              Mandate efficiency             7.9% to 10.5%                -$132 to -$30      O: High
              retrofits for                                                                  E: Medium
              commercial buildings                                                           P: High
              Require zero-energy            4.1% to 5.6%                 -$132 to -$25      O: High
              capable homes                                                                  E: High
    NEW                                                                                      P: High

 BUILDINGS
              Require zero-energy            6.5% to 8.9%                 -$120 to -$48      O: High
              capable commercial                                                             E: High
              buildings                                                                      P: High

   URBAN      High-density                       2.4%                   -$1,333 to -$702     O: High
              residential                                                                    E: High
 PLANNING     development                                                                    P: Medium


 ENERGY                                          3.9%                      $15 - $139        O: High
              Incentives for
                                                                                             E: Medium
 SUPPLY       distributed PV
                                                                                             P: High

              $20 carbon tax                     11.3%                         $20           O: High

  FINANCIAL
                                                                                             E: Medium
                                                                                             P: Low

 MECHANISMS
              $50 carbon tax                     20.6%                         $50           O: High
                                                                                             E: Medium
                                                                                             P: Low



differentiate among alternatives (i.e., all the alternatives appear to do
about as well or as poorly with respect to these criteria). The students
who produced Table I-1 excluded three alternatives that they had origi-
nally considered: a local cap-and-trade program, leveraging collective
purchasing power in energy markets, and urban forestry.
                                                     T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    6 1




    You may find it useful to go through this exercise more than once, as
 your analysis evolves over time. (Table I-1 is the final version of several
 matrixes that the student group made.)
    A later version of such a matrix may also prove useful when you tell
 your story (see Step Eight). However, unless the matrix is very well
 designed and explained, it can impede the flow of your story rather than
 assist it.

Semantic Tip Here is a tip with a graphic dimension. Take advantage of
 the fact that being listed earlier (more leftward) in the matrix is usually
 taken to signify greater importance. Even if you are unsure how to
 weight criteria on some cardinal scale, with equal intervals assumed
 between all it points, you might feel better about an ordinal scale,
 requiring judgments only of “more than” and “less than.” Put what you
 think should be the weightier criteria in the more leftward columns. A
 common error that occurs in labeling the criteria columns in such a
 matrix is to fail to indicate what value is at stake and in what dimensions
 the measurement is being done. For instance, if you are assessing a
 rental subsidy program and you enter a plus sign in a column labeled
 “Landlord/tenant relations,” the reader may not know whether you
 think relations will become more harmonious, more confrontational,
 less dominated by landlords, less dominated by tenants, or something
 else. It is not sufficient that your surrounding text makes your intention
 clear; the matrix label itself must be informative. In many cases it helps
 to insert the term maximize or minimize in the criterion label. Table I-1
 is exemplary in almost all respects, except that the column labels do not
 include such words. It happens that the meaning is quite clear from the
 context, of course, but in the interests of “analytic hygiene” it would
 have been better to include them.
     If you cannot fill in the cell with a quantitatively expressed description
 of the projected outcome, you may have to settle for a verbal descriptor
 such as “very good” or a symbolic descriptor such as + or –. The opera-
 tive word here, though, is cannot. Quantification goes a long way toward
 making an analysis useful, and rough yet adequate quantification is easier
 than you might suppose. Remember, also, the heuristic of increasing or
 decreasing “the odds,” mentioned in “Step One: Define the Problem.”
 6 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




    In listing or stating criteria, speak in the declarative, not the interroga-
 tive. “How equitable is the final budget outcome?” is not a criterion; it is
 a question. “Maximize equity” is a criterion.

 How Projecting Outcomes Connects to Design Problems
Semantic Tip The Eightfold Path language of choice—problems, alterna-
 tives, criteria, projections, trade-offs—does not fit design problems (see
 “Step Three: Construct the Alternatives”) without a little translation. The
 object of design is usually an organization or a program that is, more
 generally, a system of interrelated parts. The object of design is to make
 the system perform in a certain way. You can translate the problem to be
 solved as the performance objective to be achieved. Meeting this objec-
 tive is the primary criterion of success. Other criteria are distinctly sec-
 ondary. Meeting a variety of other performance requirements usually
 means satisfying other criteria of the “constraint” type (see the earlier
 discussion of linear programming).
    Once you have designed the best system you possibly can, though, that
 design becomes just another entry in the set of alternatives you are con-
 sidering. Some other alternative, perhaps proposed by a stakeholder
 interest, less customized but perhaps also less chancy, might be sitting out
 there ready to beat back a challenge from your own best effort at design.
 The choice framework applies nicely at that point.
    In the choice framework, we typically find ourselves working on a
 single problem. That problem can have more than one aspect, though
 probably not too many. But because design problems encompass a sys-
 tem of interrelated parts, you may have to treat each part separately—
 that is, as a separate problem. For instance, consider redesigning a state
 educational system’s approach to delivering the full menu of college-
 preparatory courses to all high school students. This task involves a set of
 related but differentiable problems or performance objectives involving,
 among other things:

     • The level of discretion allowed school districts in imposing college-
       preparatory graduation requirements
     • How districts might provide student support, and how the state
       might support the districts in their efforts to do so
                                                  T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    6 3




   • The rapidity with which the new requirements might be implemented
   • The nature and adequacy of the procedures for monitoring high
     school course content
   • The proficiency level expected of students in the relevant high
     school courses24

STEP SIX: CONFRONT THE TRADE-OFFS
It sometimes happens that one of the policy alternatives under consider-
ation is expected to produce a better outcome than any of the other
alternatives with regard to every single evaluative criterion. In that case—
called “dominance”—there are no trade-offs among the alternatives.
Usually, though, you are less fortunate, and you must clarify the trade-
offs between outcomes associated with different policy options for the
sake of your client or audience.

Focus on Outcomes
A common pitfall in confronting trade-offs is to think and speak of
the trade-offs as being across alternatives rather than across projected
outcomes—for example, “trading off twenty foot-patrol police officers in
the late night hours against a lower-maintenance-cost fleet of police
vehicles.” Although such a trade-off exists, with a second’s thought you’ll
see that you can’t do anything at all with it. Both alternatives must first
be converted into outcomes before genuine trade-offs can be confronted.
Thus the competing outcomes might be fifty (plus or minus) burglaries
per year prevented by the foot-patrol officers versus a savings of $300,000
in fleet maintenance.
   The most common trade-off is between money and a good or service
received by some proportion of the citizenry, such as extending library
hours from 8 p.m. till 10 p.m., weighed against a cost of $200,000 annu-
ally. Another common trade-off, especially in regulatory policies, involves
weighing privately borne costs (a company’s installing pollution abate-
ment equipment) against social benefits (improved health of the affected
population and the protection of forests). If the projected outcomes can
be monetized—that is, expressed in dollar terms—it is sometimes simple

24. See Sutton (2008).
6 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




to evaluate the trade-offs. Just choose the option that yields the largest
net value, once costs have been subtracted from benefits. This procedure
applies nicely if budgets, and therefore the scope of the activity, are not
limited. But it can run afoul of another monetary consideration, cost-
effectiveness per unit of activity, if budgets or other inputs are limited. In
Table I-1, note that the high-density residential development option—
presumably limited in extent because of the limited likely scope of new
development—is more cost-effective than any other activity but is less
efficacious than all the others, too.
   In Table I-1, we see that there is no dominant outcome. The really
efficacious options, involving a carbon tax, are not viable politically.
Retrofitting existing buildings is apparently more efficacious than meet-
ing green standards in new buildings, but it is a strategy deemed by the
student-authors to be less viable than the latter. And, as we said earlier,
making new developments denser, although cost-effective, is not very
efficacious.
   The student-authors did not recommend choosing among these alter-
natives, however, but recommended doing as many of them at one time as
was feasible (“viable”). The trade-offs analysis would nonetheless permit
decision makers, and the public, to prioritize which alternatives to empha-
size in the likely case that priorities needed to be set. In their view, setting
standards for energy efficiency in buildings was the first order of business.

Establish Commensurability
Suppose some Alternative A1 stacks up very well on Criterion C1, mod-
erately well on C2, and poorly on C3. And suppose that A2 stacks up in
the opposite way. We can choose between the two alternatives only if we
can weight the importance of the criteria and if we can express their
relative weights in units that are commensurable across the criteria. As
you may have heard, money is everybody’s favorite candidate for the
commensurable metric. Using money as the metric is a very good idea,
and it often works much better than you might imagine. For instance,
even the “value” of life can sometimes be described reasonably well in the
metric “willingness to pay X dollars for a reduction in the risk of death
by Y percent a year,” or something like it.
                                                          T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    6 5




    However, there are limits to the money metric and to commensurabil-
ity, as well. To reach a summary judgment as to how much political equal-
ity to give up in a political redistricting case, for instance, in exchange for
how much more African American voter power, it seems impossible even
to state the trade-off in meaningful terms. In general, this problem is
known as the “multi-attribute problem.” In some deep sense the problem
is logically insoluble, although some heuristics are available to help trim it
down to its irreducible size.25

Break-even analysis revisited. We have seen how break-even analysis can
help you both to focus on which residual uncertainties you will have to
estimate and to frame the terms in which those estimates must be given
(e.g., “We have to believe Alternative A1 will produce at least X results in
order to justify choosing it.”). We turn now to how break-even analysis
can also help to solve commensurability problems.
   Consider those policy areas, such as safety regulation, where we are
often implicitly trading off dollars against risks to life. It might be sup-
posed that in order to assess these proposals, you would have to decide
what a human life is really worth—a task many of us, quite understand-
ably, are unwilling to perform. The task is made somewhat more tractable,
however, if you work with quantitative estimates and apply break-even
analysis. Suppose, for instance, that you are considering whether or not
to impose on the auto industry a new design standard that will
improve safety and save an estimated twenty-five lives every year into the
indefinite future. The cost of meeting the standard is estimated at $50
million per year indefinitely. The trade-off at the margin appears to be,
therefore, “$2 million per life.” But you don’t have to answer the question
“What’s a human life really worth?” in order to make at least some sense
of this decision. You do have to answer the question “Is a statistical life


25. See Stokey and Zeckhauser (1978, 117–133) and MacRae and Whittington (1997,
201–203). One potentially misleading heuristic has the analyst creating a score for
each alternative with respect to each criterion and then manipulating the scores
arithmetically. It is easy to get the arithmetic right, but it is often hard to come up
with scoring procedures that are not at some level arbitrary (e.g., anchored against
some arbitrarily defined level of excellence or its opposite).
6 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




(that is, the life of an unknown individual ‘drawn’ in a random manner
from some population, rather than a named person’s life) worth at least
$2 million?” That is a break-even analysis sort of question. For reasons
best known to yourself, it may be obvious to you that a statistical life
surely is—or isn’t—worth that much. And although it’s very difficult to
decide whether the worth of a statistical life falls on one or the other side
of some monetary boundary, it’s a lot less difficult than coming up with
a point value.
   Even this sort of trade-off calculation is troubling to many people, and
some find it morally repugnant. Unfortunately, repugnant or not, it is in
a sense inevitable. Whatever position you take on the auto safety design
standard described, you are by implication also taking a position on the
dollars/risk-to-life trade-off: if you favor the standard, you implicitly
believe the trade-off is worthwhile, whereas if you oppose it, you don’t.
Fortunately, this logical implication has its uses. You may in many cir-
cumstances quite sensibly prefer to rely on your intuition rather than on
some complicated systematic method. Once you have reached your con-
clusion on that basis, though, you should check your intuition by asking
yourself: “Since the implication of my policy choice is that I value X as
being worth at least (or at most) thus-and-such, do I really believe that?”

Choosing a Base Case
Choosing a base case against which to compare the other alternatives is
unavoidable. Even if the base case implicitly is “whatever situation exists
today,” which is the simplest and most obvious option, this does repre-
sent a choice. What are some of the other possible choices? Here is a list
of some possibilities, along with a brief commentary:

    • Future conditions provided that business were to continue as usual.
      This is what the authors of the matrix in Table I-1 chose. But what
      is included in the “business as usual” base case? The authors of
      Table I-1 assumed no new regulations and no changes in fossil fuel
      consumption other than those caused by demographic changes.
      They did not include possible technological changes, for instance.
    • Changes from the present that would occur if some policy not in the
      matrix were to be adopted. Suppose, for instance, that the state were
                                                              T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    6 7




     likely to finance and construct a train system connecting major cit-
     ies, and that this system were expected to reduce automobile usage
     overall by, say, 5 percent. This is like “business-as-usual” except that
     changes caused by a particular policy are in sharper focus.
   • Projections of the results of one particular policy option. In 1996 the
     RAND Corporation, referred to earlier, published a study compar-
     ing the cost-effectiveness of crime reduction strategies programs to
     the base case of the “three-strikes” mandatory incarceration policy
     that California had recently adopted. Three out of the four pro-
     grams were clearly more cost-effective, and the fourth possibly so.
     The objective was to show that on narrow crime-prevention grounds
     alone, and leaving aside humanistic considerations, “three-strikes”
     was wasting taxpayer money, since other options were cheaper for
     achieving the same objective.

   What difference does it make which base case is used? In some cases,
it definitely helps to focus attention on the worth of the base case itself,
particularly if, as in the three-strikes case, it is controversial. In other
situations, it simply provides a way of standardizing the background
against which trade-offs are evaluated across the other alternatives in the
matrix, as happens in the matrix in Table I-1. In effect, we ask how a
variety of alternatives stack up when it comes to improving on the situa-
tion described by the base case.26
   Once the base case is chosen, and the cells are filled in, and commen-
surability is pushed as far as can be done, what next? As economics
teaches us, trade-offs occur at the margin. Trade-off analysis tells us
something like this: “If we spend an extra X dollars for an extra unit of

26. When the base case is not the current situation but some array of hypothetical
outcomes, it may contain errors. In using comparisons to the base case simply in
order to compare the worth of other alternatives, these errors would be inconsequen-
tial if each of the alternatives were to be equally affected by the errors. But this will not
always be true. For instance, suppose the federal government were to impose a $10/ton
carbon tax in, say, 2025. It might matter, in comparing the alternatives in Table I-1
if, as a result, owners of existing buildings were to retrofit, and were to work on their
least energy-efficient buildings first, while new construction were less affected. In that
case, the first two options in Table I-1 would look a lot less attractive relative to the
other alternatives, since relatively severe mandates would not be necessary.
 6 8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




 Service Y, we can get an extra Z units of good outcome.” This kind of
 analysis puts the decision maker in the position to answer the question
 “Does society (or do you) value Z more or less than X?” and then to fol-
 low the obvious implication of the answer: if yes, decide for another unit
 of Y; if no, don’t.

Semantic Tip A linguistic device to help you stay focused on the margin
 is frequent use of the word extra. Note that this word appears three times
 in the example analysis in the preceding paragraph.
     Some units of Service Y can be purchased only in “lumps” larger than
 one—sometimes much larger. Consider transportation services provided
 by highways and bridges. Y might be one passenger trip from A to B, but
 most transportation construction projects (highway enlargements, new
 bridge crossings) can be undertaken only for minimum bundles of Y that
 run into the thousands of trips. Or suppose that a police chief must
 choose one of two “lumpy” alternatives, such as $1 million per year for
 more overtime on the night shift or $250,000 per year for more rapid
 replacement of police cars. The first alternative is lumpy because the
 police union insists on a minimum overtime rate for all 150 officers on
 the shift, and the second is lumpy because the auto supplier charges
 much less per vehicle after some threshold number of vehicles. If, say, the
 projected decrease in burglaries from increased overtime were 200 per
 year and that from newer vehicles were 50, the trade-off confronting the
 decision maker at the margin is an extra $5,000 per extra burglary pre-
 vented. In this case the margin is a lumpy 150 burglaries and $750,000.
 (Criteria other than burglary prevention and cost-efficiency would, of
 course, be relevant to this problem.)

 Stop! Focus, Narrow, Deepen!
 Up to this point, progress on the Eightfold Path has mainly bred expan-
 sion: of problem elements, alternatives, and criteria. It may also have bred
 an undesirable formalism, such that lists of these items may have come
 to have a life of their own. The outcomes matrix, which ideally would
 have served as a sort of “rough draft with attitude,” may have displaced
 the problem with which the project began. But the object of all your
 analytic effort should not be merely to present the client with a list of
                                                       T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    6 9




well-worked-out options. It should be to ensure that at least one of
them—and more than one, if possible—would be an excellent choice to
take aim at solving, or mitigating, the problem.
   At a minimum, this need to focus, narrow, and deepen your analysis
of the most promising alternative(s) means that you must think very
seriously about (1) the politics of getting this alternative legitimated and
adopted, and (2) the design of the ongoing institutional features that will
have the power and resources to implement the policy or program in the
long run.27

STEP SEVEN: DECIDE!
This step appears in the Eightfold Path as a check on how well you have
done your work up to this point. Even though you personally may not be
the decision maker, you should at this point pretend that you are. Then,
decide what to do, based on your own analysis. If you find this decision
difficult or troublesome, the reason may be that you have not clarified
the trade-offs sufficiently, or that you have not thought quite enough
about the probability of serious implementation problems emerging (or
not emerging), or that a crucial cost estimate is still too fuzzy and uncer-
tain, or that you have not approximated carefully enough the elasticity of
some important demand curve, and so on.
   Think of it this way: unless you can convince yourself of the plausibil-
ity of some course of action, you probably won’t be able to convince your
client—and rightly so.
   Of course, when you tell your story to your client or any other audi-
ence, you may not think it appropriate to make reference to your own
decision. You may choose, instead, to simply limit your story to a clarifi-
cation of the relevant trade-offs and leave the decision completely up to
the audience.

Apply the Twenty-Dollar-Bill Test
You should at this point subject your favored policy alternative to the
“twenty-dollar-bill test.” The name of this test is based on an old joke that

27. For reasons of space, I do not discuss the first of these matters here, but see
Appendix C for a very brief survey of pertinent institutional issues.
7 0    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




makes fun of economists. Two friends are walking down the street when
one stops to pick something up. “What about that—a twenty-dollar bill!”
he says. “Couldn’t be,” says the other, an economist. “If it were, somebody
would have picked it up already.” The analogy is this: if your favorite
policy alternative is such a great idea, how come it’s not happening already?
The most common sources of failure on this test are neglecting to con-
sider the resistance of bureaucratic and other stakeholders in the status
quo, and the lack of an entrepreneur in the relevant policy environment
who has the incentive to pick up what seems like a great idea and see it
through. Failure on this test is not fatal, of course. Just keep fiddling until
you invent a variant of your basic idea that will pass.

STEP EIGHT: TELL YOUR STORY
After many iterations of some or all of the steps recommended here—
principally, redefining your problem, reconceptualizing your alternatives,
reconsidering your criteria, reassessing your projections, reevaluating the
trade-offs—you are ready to tell your story to some audience. The audi-
ence may be your client, or it may include a broader aggregation of stake-
holders and interested parties. It may be hostile, or it may be friendly.
Your presentation may be a one-time-only telling, or it may be merely the
first effort in a planned long-term campaign to gather support behind a
legislative or executive change. (For a discussion of the issues likely to be
involved in such a campaign, see Appendix D, “Strategic Advice on the
Dynamics of Political Support.”)

Apply the Grandma Bessie Test
Before proceeding further, however, you need another little reality check.
Suppose your Grandma Bessie, who is intelligent but not very sophisti-
cated politically, asks you about your work. You say you are a “policy
analyst working for. . . .” She says, “What’s that?” You explain that you’ve
been working on “the problem of. . . .” She says, “So, what’s the answer?”
You have one minute to offer a coherent, down-to-earth explanation
before her eyes glaze over. If you feel yourself starting to hem and haw,
you haven’t really understood your own conclusions at a deep enough
level to make sense to others, and probably not to yourself, either. Back
to the drawing board until you get it straight.
                                                         T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    7 1




   Now consider the possibility that someone might actually wish to
base a real decision or a policy proposal on your analysis. (It’s been
known to happen.) Even if you, as an analyst, would not have to deal
directly with such a tough audience as Grandma Bessie and her kin
(including, of course, Grandpa Max), it’s likely that someone will have
to do so. At the very least, therefore, you’ll have to be able to explain your
basic story to someone in sufficiently simple and down-to-earth terms
that that someone will be able to carry on with the task of public, dem-
ocratic education.28

Gauge Your Audience(s)
Assuming that you’ve passed the Grandma Bessie test, identify and assess
the likely audience(s) that are more sophisticated and involved than
Grandma Bessie.
   First comes your client, the person or persons whose approval you
need most—your hierarchical superior(s), perhaps, or those who are
funding your work. What is the relationship between you and your cli-
ent? What you say and how you say it should depend a great deal on
whether your relationship is long term and on whether it is carried on
face to face. In particular, how easy will it be for you to correct any mis-
understandings that may arise?
   Next, think about the larger political environment. Who do you think
will “use” the analysis and for what purpose(s)? Will anyone pick up your
results for use in an advocacy context? Would you regard this use of your
results as desirable? Desirable if certain advocates use your work and
undesirable if others do so? Do you want to do anything to segregate the
elements of your analysis by the type of audience you might want it to
reach—or not reach? Are you, perhaps inadvertently, using scare words
that will alienate certain audiences?


28. Sometimes this is referred to as the challenge of giving an “elevator speech.” You
and your boss, or some relevant other, find yourselves together in an elevator for too
long a time to make do with just “Hi, how are ya’?” The boss asks how your project
is going. You have maybe a minute to explain what you’re up to and why he should
be interested and perhaps persuaded. So have your “elevator speech” committed to
memory and ready to go at a moment’s notice.
7 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




  If you are making a clear recommendation, make sure that you raise
and rebut possible objections to it that might occur to various important
audiences. Also make sure that you compare it to what you or others
might regard as the next best course of action, so as to be ready to show
why yours is better.

Consider What Medium to Use
You can tell your story in written or in oral form. In either case, com-
municate simply and clearly. The guiding principle is that, other things
being equal, shorter is always better. In written presentations, good sub-
headings and graphics can make reading and comprehension easier.
Visual aids such as flip charts, overhead transparencies, and computer-
based slide projections often help in oral presentations.
   Oral presentations require practice, self-discipline, and a little knowl-
edge of some basic principles. The most basic of the basic principles are
these: speak very slowly and distinctly; speak loudly enough to be heard
throughout the room, even over distracting noises; speak in a lower reg-
ister, which tends to increase perceived trustworthiness and credibility;
do not fidget, but don’t stand like a stick, either; make lots of eye contact
with audience members and, in doing so, don’t favor one side of the
room over another. Speaking slowly and distinctly is probably harder
than you think—and more important, too.

Give Your Story a Logical Narrative Flow
Your story’s flow should be designed with the reader’s (or listener’s)
needs and interests and abilities in mind. In both written and oral pre-
sentations, it should be evident to the audience what motivates the entire
analysis. Therefore, it is best to open with a statement of the problem
your analysis addresses.29
   It is also important to motivate the more detailed steps in the flow of
the analysis, that is, the sections, paragraphs, and sentences. Most readers
will look for the motivation of any element in what immediately precedes

29. An unusually fine manual on how to give slide-based oral briefings is published
by the RAND Corporation (1994).
                                                    T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    7 3




it, which makes it important to avoid lengthy digressions. For these rea-
sons, be wary of sections that you are tempted to label “Background.”
Similarly, the phrases “Before turning to . . .” and “It is first necessary to
explain/understand the history of . . .” are usually signs of undigested
material. Many readers will be alert to these danger signs, so you should be,
too. Policy analysis, remember, is about the future. It is often not obvious
how or whether history affects the future, and the burden should be on the
writer or speaker to show exactly how this effect will come about.
    A common, though not uniformly applicable, organizing framework
is to begin with a good problem definition and then to treat each alterna-
tive you consider as a major section. Within each such section, you proj-
ect the probable outcome(s) of implementing the alternative and assess
how likely such outcome(s) are in the light of some causal model and
associated evidence. Following these discussions, you review and sum-
marize the alternative outcomes and discuss their trade-offs. This frame-
work contains no special discussion of criteria; however, sometimes an
explicit discussion of criteria is important. It might appear either just
before or just after the presentation of the alternatives and their associ-
ated outcomes.

Some Common Pitfalls
Following the Eightfold Path too closely. Sometimes it helps to structure
your narrative flow as though you were leading the reader by the hand
down the Eightfold Path. But usually this approach is a mistake. The
purpose of the Eightfold Path, remember, is to help you think through a
complicated problem. It is not at all necessary to use it in telling the story,
though some aspects of it sometimes help.

Compulsive qualifying. Don’t interrupt the flow of an argument in order
to display all the qualifications and uncertainties about some particular
element in the argument. A linguistic way around this pitfall is to use
adjectives or adjective phrases such as most, on average, and more often
than not to state the generality, and then to return to the exceptions in the
next section. (Or, if the exceptions and qualifications really can’t wait, try
a parenthetical sentence or a footnote.)
7 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




Showing off all your work. Don’t include every fact you ever learned in
the course of your research. Even if you’ve done a good and thorough job
of research and analysis, most of what you have learned will prove to be
irrelevant by the time you’re finished. That is, you will have succeeded in
focusing your own attention on what is really important and in down-
playing what only appeared important at the beginning. You don’t usu-
ally need to take your reader on the same wandering course you were
obliged to follow.

Listing without explaining. Should you list every alternative policy that
you intend to analyze in the report before you actually get around to
providing the analysis? Such a list is a good thing when the alternatives
are not numerous, when they are all taken seriously either by you or by
your audience, and when they will prepare the reader’s mind for the
detailed assessment that will follow. However, if you have many alterna-
tives to consider, the reader will forget what’s on the list, and if some of
the alternatives turn out to be easily dismissed upon closer scrutiny,
you’ll simply have been setting up straw men and wasting the reader’s
mental energy.
   Similarly, be cautious about listing every evaluative criterion of inter-
est before coming to the assessment of the alternatives being considered.
Usually—though not always—there is not much to be said in a separate
section about criteria that can’t be better said when you’re actually writ-
ing the assessment sections.

Spinning a mystery yarn. Start with the conclusion, the bottom line, the
absolutely most interesting point you intend to make. Then present all
the reasoning and evidence that you have to make your audience reach
the same conclusions you have reached. In short, follow the opposite
strategy from that which a novelist would follow.

Inflating the style. Avoid the pomposity and circumlocutions of the
bureaucratic and the academic styles. (Essential reading: George
Orwell, Politics and the English Language.) Also to be avoided: a chatty,
insider’s style—such as, “We all understand what creeps our opponents
are, don’t we?”
                                                    T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    7 5




Structure Your Report
Unless the report is short, begin with an executive summary.
   If your report is over fifteen to twenty pages long, say, a table of con-
tents may well be helpful. If there are many tables and figures, either in
the text or in the appendixes, a list of these items can be helpful, as well.
Detailed technical information or calculations should appear in appen-
dixes rather than in the text. However, enough technical information,
and reasoning, should appear in the text itself to persuade the reader that
you really do know what you’re talking about and that your argument is
at least credible.
   Use headings and subheadings to keep the reader oriented and to
break up large bodies of text; make sure your formatting (capital letters,
italics, boldface, indentation) is compatible with, and indeed supports,
the logical hierarchy of your argument.

Table format. Current professional practice is very poor with respect to
the formatting of tables. Do not imitate it but strive to improve it. Every
table (or figure) should have a number (Table 1, for instance, or Figure 3-A)
and a title. The title should be intelligible; it is often useful to have the
title describe the main point to be learned from the table (e.g., “Actual
Risks of Drinking and Driving Rise Rapidly with Number of Drinks—
but Are Greatly Underestimated by College Students”). Each row and
column in a table must be labeled, and the label should be interpretable
without too much difficulty.
    Normally, a table either is purely descriptive or is designed to demon-
strate some causal relationship. In the latter case, it is usually desirable to
create a table that makes a single point (or at most two) and that can stand
alone without need of much explanation in the surrounding text. It is
usually better to use two or three small tables to make two or three points
than to construct one massive table and then try to explain its contents by
means of the text that surrounds it.
    Tables usually require footnotes, and there should almost always be a
source note at the bottom. Sometimes these notes refer to data sources
used to make the table, and sometimes they attempt to clarify the mean-
ing of the row or column labels, which are necessarily abbreviated.
7 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




   Please do NOT imitate academic practice, which is to overstuff tables
with all kinds of numbers and to mindlessly apply obscure column and
row labels. Academic practice presupposes that all the data have been
gathered “scientifically” and without serious bias; therefore, the presenta-
tion style aims to convey these facts. Unimportant data share space in
academic tables with important data so as to permit the reader to see that
the complete truth has been told, that the author has not cherry-picked
the data to convey only what is interesting and has conveyed the full story
about what is statistically significant as well as what is not. If these issues
are important to you and your readers, by all means provide the full
story. But do it in appendixes. In most cases, though, try to minimize the
information provided in a single table.

References and sources. Include a listing of references and sources at the
end of the presentation. Books and articles should be cited in academic
style (alphabetical order by author). The main point is to provide biblio-
graphic help to curious or skeptical readers who want to track down
references for themselves. There are several acceptable styles, but a good
model is the one used in the book review section of the Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management, which is simple and direct.
   The current trend is toward “scientific citation” in lieu of footnote
references in the text. That is, cite the author’s last name and year of pub-
lication in parentheses in the text; the reader then consults the references
section at the end for the full citation. If you follow this practice, the
reference section should list the author(s) and year before the title of the
work and other publication details. Sometimes you will want to include
a page number in the parenthetical citation, as well.
   Legal citation style is quite different. If most of the references are legal,
then it is advisable to cite all references in bottom-of-page footnotes.
However, you can keep the scientific citation format within the footnotes.
   Notes are easier to read if they appear on the same page as the referenced
text—that is, if you display them as footnotes rather than as endnotes.

Using a Memo Format
If your analysis is to be delivered in a memo, you should present it within
a standard memo format, as follows:
                                                     T H E E I G H T F O L D PA T H    7 7




     [Date]
     To: [Recipient name(s), official position(s)]
     From: [Your name, position. Sign or initial next to or above your
     name.]
     Subject: [Brief and grammatically correct description of the
     subject]

     [The first sentence or two should remind recipient of the fact
     that she or he asked you for a memo on this subject, and why.
     Alternatively, you could explain why you are submitting this
     memo on this subject to the recipient at this time.]
     [If the memo is long, you might open and close with a sum-
     mary paragraph or two. If you open with a long summary, the
     closing summary can be short.]
     [If the memo is long, consider breaking it up with subheads.]

Develop a Press Release
Most policy analyses do not become the subjects of press releases or of
radio or television sound bites, but some do. Others become candidates
for such treatment, and all can profit, even in their extended form, from
the analyst’s reflecting on how to condense the essential message.
Hence, it will probably serve an analytic purpose—and sometimes a
political one—if you sketch out a press release or a few ideas for sound
bites. You may also want to think strategically and defensively to see
how an opponent might characterize your work in a press release or
sound bite.

PowerPoint
PowerPoint slides often supplement oral presentations, and indeed
sometimes replace written reports altogether as nonverbal means of
communication. The latter practice does economize on staff time to
some extent, but it has the drawback (in my eyes, at least) of forcing the
reader to imagine the connective issue that oral presentations normally
7 8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




provides. In any case, my comments on PowerPoint as supplementation
will be brief and rather personal, as plenty of full-scale manuals are
available.

    • Keep it simple: have each slide present a separate point; use phrases,
      not sentences; and use only two or at most three colors.
    • Avoid cutesy icons and “cool” moving animals.
    • Think of the viewer’s needs: to see letters and numbers at a fair
      distance, and to not be bored by having you, as presenter, simply
      read what is on the screen.
    • Display the slide for long enough so that the viewer could actually
      read and absorb its contents—especially important for tables and
      graphs.
    • Include slides at suitable intervals that summarize what has been
      said so far and point the way to what is yet to come.
    • Make available to the audience, after the presentation—not during,
      as it is distracting—hard copies of slides (arranged six per page).
    • Visual supplements, such as photographs, can nicely support all the
      words, provided they are carefully chosen and displayed.
                                                                 PART




ASSEMBLING EVIDENCE
                                                              II
C    onsider the problems confronting you as a researcher preparing an
     analysis of water pollution control programs for Blue Lake. You
know that there is a dirty lake; that federal, state, and local legislation is
directed toward the goal of cleaning up the lake (or preventing it from
getting much dirtier); and that a state environmental protection office in
the area has something to do with administering some or all of the rel-
evant antipollution policies or programs. But you need to know more.
You need to map the present policies and programs, their political envi-
ronment, the ways in which the bureaucracies function to implement
them, and the criteria by which experts and nonprofessionals evaluate
them. You also need to make some decisions about how you will evalu-
ate them. Then you need to learn what data are relevant to these criteria
and figure out how to obtain these data. If you are planning to recom-
mend changes in existing programs, you must develop the evidence that
will permit you to make reasonable projections of the likely outcomes.
In addition, you must learn what sort of changes the present set of rel-
evant actors may be prepared to make or are capable of making.
   These are large challenges, but your resources in time, energy, money,
and the goodwill of potential informants and interviewers are probably
not at all large. Moreover, you would like to finish the study in no more
than six months, let us say, and you do not want to waste the first five
months simply getting your bearings. Where are you to begin? And hav-
ing begun, how are you to proceed efficiently?


                                                                            79
8 0    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




GETTING STARTED
The first step is simple: Start with what you know. This injunction may seem
self-evident or trivial or both. In fact, it is common for people to act in
contradiction of it. Confronted by a new and challenging research task,
they expect to flounder anxiously for a few weeks or months. And, behold,
they do, for feeling stupid makes you so. Rarely is this waste of time and
energy necessary, however. A few facts, or even vague recollections, plus
some intelligent reasoning can usually move the project onto firm footing
surprisingly quickly. Suppose, for example, that you are asked to do a policy
analysis of “the future of the Wichahissic bituminous coal industry,” a sub-
ject as remote from your interest or previous experience as galactic spectros-
copy. You might take stock by writing a memo to yourself as follows:

    • I was probably asked to do this study because someone thinks the
      future of the Wichahissic bituminous coal industry is pretty bleak
      or else because it is looking up. If the former, the results will prob-
      ably be used to justify some sort of government subsidy; if the
      latter, the results will be used for promotional purposes by the
      industry itself or by local merchants whose livelihood depends on
      the health of the industry.
    • The future of any industry depends in part on market demand. The
      demand for coal has probably been declining, partly due to the
      availability of substitute fuels.
    • Maybe high production costs imperil the health of the industry.
      Could it be that coal-mining technology is underdeveloped? If so,
      why? Perhaps the coalfields are running out and the technology has
      not been developed to handle poor, as opposed to rich, deposits.
    • There were a lot of miners’ strikes a few years ago. Are labor-
      management relations better or worse now? Are wage demands
      forcing the companies to go under?
    • Coal transportation depends on railroads. So, if the railroads are
      sick, could coal be well?
    • Coal is black and sooty, gives off a lot of smoke and has a nasty
      carbon footprint. Surely this is an ecological menace. Who, if any-
      one, is paying attention to this problem? Or is it really a problem?
                                                A S S E M B L I N G E V I D E N C E    8 1




    Coal mining destroys the beauty, and probably the ecology, of the
    countryside. Is this really so? Might the Sierra Club have useful data
    on these questions?
  • Perhaps coal is not sick, just bituminous coal. Maybe the anthracite
    industry is flourishing. Surely there is a trade association of coal-
    mining companies with data here. Call up the nearest big coal-mining
    company and find out its name and address from the public relations
    office.
  • Perhaps coal is okay, but Wichahissic has a problem. But then again,
    Wichahissic does not seem to be as much in the news as Pokanoka,
    whose plight seems to be the archetype for “the depressed area.” Check
    BLS (Bureau of Labor Statistics) for unemployment figures here.

   Writing memos of this kind to yourself is useful not only at the begin-
ning of a project but whenever you feel yourself beginning to drift toward
panic or confusion. Following this initial stock-taking, you should think
of yourself as designing, executing, and periodically readjusting a research
strategy that will exploit certain predictable changes in your potential for
gaining and utilizing information:

  • Locating relevant sources. Over time, you decrease your uncertainty
    about what is worth knowing and how to learn it.
  • Gaining and maintaining access to sources. (1) Over time, you aug-
    ment your ability to arrange interviews with busy or hostile per-
    sons, and to obtain data that are not clearly in the public domain;
    (2) over time, you also—and unavoidably—use up your access to
    certain sources, and you must therefore conserve such exhaustible
    resources for use only when the time is propitious.
  • Accumulating background information as leverage. Over time, you
    improve your capacity to interpret data and to force them out of
    reluctant sources, thereby increasing your background knowledge.
  • Protecting political credibility. Over time, the research process itself
    creates an environment that will either help or hinder the adop-
    tion and implementation of your—or your client’s—eventual
    recommendations.
8 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




   The optimal strategy for managing any of these problems may conflict
with the optimal strategies for dealing with the others. Therefore, after each
problem is discussed in a separate section below, the final section of this
chapter is reserved for a brief treatment of the trade-offs involved in trying
to meet all strategic imperatives simultaneously. I assume throughout that
the reader is an inexperienced policy researcher who has had academic
training in the social sciences. Hence, I go to some lengths, at various
points, to allude to differences between social science research methodol-
ogy and the methods of policy research. I trust that the more experienced
researcher will also find some profit in the arguments here, if only to con-
ceptualize more clearly what she has already learned to do intuitively.
   A further clarification about the intended audience is in order. You
start your task with certain resources and constraints, some of which are
derived from your own experience and personality and others from your
institutional location. Although institutional location is especially impor-
tant in designing an optimal research strategy, it is not discussed in this
book. Suffice it to say that the resources and constraints of a legislative
staff assistant are quite different from those of her counterpart in a
bureaucratic setting and are even more dissimilar to those of a student
working with a campus-based Public Interest Research Group (PIRG).
The strategic advice offered here is intended to be sufficiently general to
meet the needs of researchers in any of these circumstances, however.

LOCATING RELEVANT SOURCES
Unlike most social science research, most policy research is derivative
rather than original. That is, it is produced by creative play with ideas and
data already developed by others. Only occasionally does the policy
researcher set out to generate new data or assume responsibility for
inventing a bright policy idea from scratch. Instead, the researcher’s role
is preeminently discovering, collating, interpreting, criticizing, and syn-
thesizing ideas and data that others have developed already. To be sure,
social science research often works this way, too, but it also places a much
higher premium on originality. In a sense, the policy researcher becomes
an expert on experts—those scholars and persons of experience who are
thought to be relatively sophisticated about the policy area.
                                                 A S S E M B L I N G E V I D E N C E    8 3




Consulting Both Documents and People
In policy research, almost all likely sources of information, data, and ideas
fall into two general types: documents and people. By documents I mean
anything that has to be read: Web sites, journal articles, books, newspapers
and magazines, government reports, statistical archives, interoffice mem-
oranda, position papers, bulletins, and so on. By people I mean anyone,
whether a single individual or a group, who is to be consulted in person.
Research on any policy problem usually entails a canvass of both types
of sources.
    Avoid the pitfall of overemphasizing one type at the expense of the
other. Sometimes you fall into the trap out of habit: if you start out
interviewing experts, experienced administrators, and other informed
persons, you continue doing so until you come to define “interviewing”
as what your job is all about. You forget that the experts themselves
typically have obtained a good deal of their expertise by studying docu-
ments, and that much of what administrators offer can also be found
in agency reports, legislative hearings, published statutes and regula-
tions, and so on.
    Another reason for getting stuck in one medium and neglecting the
other is an individual preference for less or more personal interaction—
that is, for choosing to conduct your research via the Internet or in librar-
ies (or files, in an organizational setting) or for concentrating on field-
work instead. But it is usually desirable not only to consult both types of
sources (documents and people) but also to consult them in alternating
order: a spate of interviewing followed by a retreat to the Internet or the
library followed by another round of interviewing, and so on. If for no
other reason, there is probably a psychic economy in arranging and exe-
cuting a fieldwork agenda in a consolidated time span, as there is in col-
lecting and exploring a large body of documentary material.
    In a more general way, however, one source should be used to locate
another and this branching out can just as easily lead from one medium
to the other as it can from source to source of the same type. More explic-
itly: people lead to documents as well as to other people, and documents
lead to people as well as to other documents. There are thus four basic
branches on the tree of knowledge, each of which I discuss in turn.
8 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




People leading to people. Often one informant leads spontaneously to
another by remarking during the course of an interview or a conversa-
tion, “Have you seen X yet? She’s very knowledgeable about. . . .” This
information can be stimulated by your asking questions such as “Who
else would be a good person to talk to about. . . .?” or the more specific
“Who would be a good person to see in Agency Y?” For reasons of tact,
you might frame the question more tentatively: “Do you think it would
be advisable to talk to X—or do you think that would not be advisable?”
Sometimes it is a good idea to ask the informant explicitly if his name can
be used in seeking an appointment with the person he has suggested.
This gives him an opportunity to protect himself if he does not want his
name to be used and an opportunity to encourage name-dropping if he
believes it will serve his interests. (That is, A may wish B to know that A
has spoken of him as “a knowledgeable person,” or words to that effect.)
Make sure that the informant provides sufficient contact information for
you to locate anyone he recommends seeing.
    Knowing whom to stay away from is often an important by-product of
inquiries such as these. If the informant is trusting and wishes to be help-
ful, he may volunteer a cautionary aside such as, “If you do go to see X,
you’ll probably find her reserved if not unsympathetic.” Unless X is a very
important step in the developmental sequence at that moment, this may
very well be a clue not to approach her until better groundwork has been
laid for such a meeting. Another important by-product of such inquiries
is a file of information on who is friendly, or antagonistic, to whom. Such
information will be useful in constructing a map of political and admin-
istrative feasibility for any new program that you may eventually propose.

People leading to documents. Just as you can ask informants whom else
to see or talk to, you can also ask them what else to read and how to
obtain it. In visiting informants in their offices, you can sometimes get
useful hints by scanning the bookshelves and the papers on tables and
desktops for titles and authors or agency names. Also, take away from the
interview all the documents that the informant is willing to give you,
even if you are not sure how relevant they are. The chances are good that
you will turn up some interesting new material in the collection you
eventually develop, and, in any case, you may avoid a trip to the library
                                                A S S E M B L I N G E V I D E N C E    8 5




should you later wish to quote these documents or to report precise
bibliographic information. Finally, put yourself on mailing lists, so as to
be on the receiving end of whatever stream of reports, bulletins, newslet-
ters, circulars, and so on are distributed by organizations operating in the
policy area. Many agencies keep budgetary and other numerical informa-
tion in electronic spreadsheet form; ask if the files can be sent to you or,
better yet, copy the files to a USB flash drive before you leave the office.

Documents leading to documents. Anyone who has ever written a sub-
stantial academic research paper in history or the social sciences has
probably learned how to use one document to discover another through
Web links, footnotes, and bibliographies. The same procedures work in
policy research. In addition, a researcher frequently uncovers references
that are incomplete from a strictly academic point of view but that may
still be useful for policy research. These include references to agencies or
organizations (and even individuals) that have an ongoing responsibility
for or interest in the policy area, some of whom can be expected to spon-
sor studies, reports, position papers, and so on that may prove invaluable.
    Once research is under way, documents lead to documents in a rela-
tively straightforward manner and without much difficulty. The problem
is in knowing where to start when the research effort is just beginning.
The easiest place to begin is the Internet, where Google or some other
search engine can be used to find the sites of advocacy groups putting
forth their views of the problem and possible solutions. These sites prob-
ably contain valuable information and are a useful source of ideas and
further leads. Because they are likely to be one-sided, however, you
should try to find advocacy sites with opposing views.
    But advocacy groups are just a beginning. More useful are the Web sites
of policy think tanks, such as the Brookings Institution and the American
Enterprise Institute. These are relatively mainstream institutions that pro-
duce large numbers of policy-relevant papers annually in almost all policy
domains. The best of these papers connect concepts from the social sci-
ences (often by noted scholars) with applied problems, and they often
provide an overview of some policy area. Brookings is sometimes said to
be a “liberal” think tank and AEI “conservative.” There is some truth in
these characterizations, but such labeling is not as important as the fact
8 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




that each of these institutions cares about its reputation for sound ana-
lytic work. It might be fair to say that they have political “orientations”
rather than “biases.” The same is generally true of the “liberal” Center on
Budget and Policy Priorities, the “conservative” Heritage Foundation, and
the “libertarian” Cato Institute. In the environmental area, the leading
think tank is Resources for the Future, which favors a benefit-cost
approach to environmental policy.
   The Web sites of various governmental oversight institutions can be
very helpful once you have in mind a particular legislative or regulatory
issue. The Congressional Budget Office (www.cbo.gov) does hundreds of
studies per year and posts many online. The Government Accountability
Office (www.gao.gov) does the same.
   Do not be satisfied with only the sites that are accessible by means of a
public-domain search engine. If you have access to the online resources of
a university (or governmental) library, use it. University or government-
wide libraries typically subscribe to databases that can provide access to
full-text newspaper and magazine articles (Lexis-Nexis), as well as to
abstracts and full-text publications in scholarly journals (JSTOR, in par-
ticular). The CQ Researcher Online, published by CQ Press, provides
access to feature-length journalistic articles dating back to 1991. National
Journal is similar to The CQ Researcher.
   Because Internet sources are so accessible, it is easy to forget about
books (until the day they are all online, of course). Unfortunately, elec-
tronic search procedures do not work as well for finding good and appro-
priate books as they do for finding articles and relatively ephemeral
materials. The best way to locate relevant book-length sources is to find
out what the experts and advocates recommend. You can check the bib-
liographies in journal articles or—following the “people leading to docu-
ments” strategy—ask them.

Documents leading to people. Once having read, or read about, the work
done by certain experts, academic or otherwise, you may wish to consult
with them face-to-face or by telephone. You should be wary, however, of
mistaking the nominal author of a study for the real one, particularly when
that author is a person or group in officialdom. The nominal authors of
Supreme Court decisions, to take an extreme example, are the Associate
                                                  A S S E M B L I N G E V I D E N C E    8 7




Justices, but the real authors are usually their clerks, who in turn probably
draw most of their arguments from the briefs filed by the lawyers on the
case. Similarly, you should look behind the agency official whose name
appears on the cover of a report, to locate the staff member(s) who did the
work and may be named on the inside pages or referred to in a preface.

Seeking Secondhand Information
To find out what Senator A is doing or thinking about a policy problem,
you need not necessarily ask the senator herself. Tens or hundreds of
individuals may know the answer, or at least part of the answer. Such
secondhand information must be used cautiously and checked constantly
for bias or error. But it is not in any a priori sense inferior to information
obtained firsthand, which may have its own biases and factual errors. To
use a legal analogy, one relies for “truth” on witnesses rather than on the
defendant, who, after all, cannot easily or prudently be asked to testify
against himself. Sometimes it makes sense to obtain firsthand informa-
tion as a supplement to the other, particularly if there is reason to think
that failure to do so might ultimately jeopardize the credibility of the
final research product.
   The use of secondhand sources is especially important in seeking
political feasibility data. Suppose, for example, that you are planning to
recommend that emergency ambulance services be centralized under the
city police department, and you want to estimate the probable reaction
of the fire chief to such a recommendation. You could ask the fire chief
himself, but he might not be willing to tell the truth, especially if he were
going to hold out his acquiescence in return for better terms or for some
reciprocal benefit. That is, he might in principle be willing to go along
with the change—he might even be enthusiastic about it—but for bar-
gaining purposes he might not be prepared to say so. On the other hand,
he might really be against it but not be willing to admit that, lest people
call him an obstructionist. In either case, the fire chief is not a reliable
source of this information. Eventually it might be desirable to ask him his
opinion directly, but you could probably learn as much or more by ask-
ing instead a variety of secondhand sources, such as a veteran city hall
reporter, rank-and-file firefighters, someone in the city manager’s office,
and someone from the police department.
8 8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




Finding Multiple Sources of Firsthand Information
Suppose that you wish to know about the past relationship between the
police and fire departments. Have they been relatively cooperative,
antagonistic, or indifferent? If for some reason you do not wish to ask the
fire chief, it is always possible to ask the police chief, since she has also
been a partner to these relations. Her view or interpretation of the rela-
tionship may differ from that of the fire chief, but she is as much a par-
ticipant and her knowledge just as direct.
   This principle has numerous applications. If you want to know what
happened at a particular meeting to which you were denied admission (or
to which you could not go for other reasons), there are many participants
to query. If you want to know how one particular participant behaved at
that meeting, you do not necessarily have to ask that participant. You can
ask others who attended. If you wish to see a memorandum sent by Smith
to Jones, you can ask either Smith or Jones, depending on which one you
believe will be more agreeable—or you can obtain a photocopy from a
third party.1

Searching for Sources and Searching for Knowledge
At the beginning of a policy research project, you face a dual uncertainty:
about what you think you ought to know and about where you can turn
to learn it. These are interdependent questions, in the sense that the
reduction of one type of uncertainty is both a consequence of and a con-
dition for the reduction of the other.


1. The notion of systematically using secondhand sources and the notion of finding
multiple sources for firsthand information are foreign to the spirit and practice of
much social science research, which typically assumes that when you want to know
the mental states or the conduct of a given individual, the best source is that indi-
vidual. Such research then worries about how to devise measuring instruments and
interviews that will register these facts about the individual with the least distortion.
Often this is quite appropriate for the questions requiring basic and original
research, when the object is to get pure data for pure understanding. But in policy
research, the problem is to get a sufficient understanding of the world to be able to
make estimates about alternative courses of action. Since there is much uncertainty
about the future, and so many uncontrollable variables that will enter into future
action, too much precision about the past and present frequently gets in the way.
                                                  A S S E M B L I N G E V I D E N C E    8 9




   Consider first what happens as you clarify your ideas about what
you think you ought to know. Simultaneously, you are able to exclude
certain sources you would otherwise have consulted and, because you
know better what your objectives are, you are able to intensify your
search for sources of greater relevance. This is the classic research
model, in which ends determine means—that is, a constantly evolving
set of knowledge objectives gives shape to the strategy of source selec-
tion and consultation. It is as applicable to policy research as to any
other sort of social inquiry.
   Its exact opposite is also applicable. Because the cost of searching for
adequate sources is so high in time and energy, when you find a rich
source it is wise to mine it intensively, even if that decision slightly alters
your original knowledge objectives. If you wish to make recommenda-
tions to the state legislature concerning the reduction of criminal recidi-
vism rates, for instance, the most relevant data source (recidivism in that
particular state) may not be as rich—and therefore as useful—as data
from the bureau of criminal statistics run by some state that does an
especially good job of collecting such data.
   One danger in this sort of pragmatism is that you may spend too much
of your time on what appears to be a rich source, not knowing that there
are much richer ones just around the corner. That is why it is wise to invest
a good deal of time initially in canvassing a variety of possible sources and
developing a broad overview of both the policy area and what means there
are to learn about it. After this initial survey, it is possible to return to
sources that look unusually rich. This procedure also guards against the
second, and more important, danger in letting the sources guide you:
you might lose sight of more desirable and feasible knowledge objectives.
In the final analysis, there must be a balance between the classic model
of ends (knowledge) dictating means (sources) and the pragmatic model of
ends evolving out of the means one has at hand.

GAINING ACCESS AND ENGAGING ASSISTANCE
Gaining access can be a problem. If you wish to interview Assembly
Member Jones, you must persuade Jones’s appointments secretary that
you are on serious business and that in any event you will not be put off.
You must arrange an appointment for a not-too-distant date and persist
9 0    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




even after Jones breaks the first appointment and fails to show up for the
one made in lieu of that one. If you may wish to interview Jones a second
time, you must take pains to keep this possibility open, and perhaps to
foster it by your conduct during the first interview.
   You may need to engage the active assistance of some informants,
especially those who stand at the gateway to an agency’s performance
and budgetary data. Often these data are in a raw state—that is, the data
are in the files but need to be collated and tabulated. Sometimes the data
are in a semiprocessed condition; that is, they have been collated and
tabulated, but they have not been put in a format intelligible to the
researcher. (They are still in a format that is intelligible to the program
managers, but this format does not fully reveal the meaning of the data
to the researcher.) In such a case, you may wish to know about seeming
inconsistencies in the classification of cases, or about the meaning of
certain class designations that the managers have developed for their
own decision making.
   Finally, there are data that have been prepared for public use but have
not been processed completely or adequately for your purposes. Suppose
that the intramural evaluation staff of a state penal institution, for exam-
ple, has issued its annual report on releases and recidivists, but you can-
not tell from the report how reliably they have ascertained the prior
arrest and conviction records of the so-called first offenders. Did they
rely on probation officer reports? On prison records? Records from other
states? The error structure of an agency’s data is often not known to the
agency, and if it is, it may not be made known to the public. In this case,
as in the case of raw and semiprocessed data, interpretive assistance is
needed from the agency itself. How much assistance it is willing to give
may depend, in part at least, on how well you have established rapport
with the agency and its personnel.

Getting an Appointment
Why should any informant grant you, a mere policy researcher, an inter-
view? American manners and mores provide the most compelling reason—
it is part of our definition of courtesy. If someone talks to you, even
through your appointments secretary, you are supposed to talk back. Of
course, the more powerful, busy, or politically defensive the personage
                                                  A S S E M B L I N G E V I D E N C E    9 1




besought, the less will be the force of simple courtesy. In such cases, you
might try to appeal to a sense of noblesse oblige or, if you have a presti-
gious institutional affiliation, to a willingness to exercise your caste privi-
leges. In addition, many people simply feel flattered by the interest of an
outsider—even a policy researcher—who wants to listen to them.
   More reliable than these appeals to courtesy or vanity, however, is an
appeal to political self-interest. Try to indicate that the outcome of your
research is likely to have a bearing on the interviewee’s (or her agency’s)
political fortunes and ambitions. It would therefore be prudent for her to
be cooperative, to arrange for you to hear her (or her agency’s) point of
view, and indeed to use the interview setting to assess the relevant politi-
cal implications of your work. Of course, it may require some fast talking
over the telephone, when you call for an appointment, in order to set her
mind thinking in these directions. In dealing with an appointments sec-
retary, who will probably be even less sensitive to your political cues, you
may have to make your points indelicately explicit. Instead of relying on
the vagaries of a telephone conversation or an appointments secretary, it
may be useful to write a letter requesting an interview, followed up by a
telephone call.
   Your informants will often be acquainted with one another and will
occasionally talk among themselves about you and your work. Since you
want such discussions to serve your interests rather than to work against
them, you should try to develop a reputation as a competent, knowl-
edgeable, and energetic researcher who is likely to produce something of
intellectual or political significance. The best way to develop such a
reputation is actually to be such a person, but, in addition, certain
stratagems may prove useful. Attempt, for instance, to become a familiar
face, by attending meetings and conferences that your potential infor-
mants attend, and by loitering around office cafeterias or after-hours
places that they frequent. Try to impress people with your ability to gain
entrée to meetings that are only quasi-public in nature, and by talking
in public places to important personages. All this familiarity will back-
fire if you appear pesky or inept, so some judiciousness is in order. Also,
you should appear to be learning quickly and critically while in these
settings, rather than observing passively and dully. A notebook or laptop
computer, in which you enter notes fast and furiously, is a good stage
9 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




prop as well as useful in its own right. Likewise, animated conversation,
preferably observed rather than overheard, can enhance your appear-
ance in these settings. But do not be indiscreet by becoming a bearer of
information from one interviewee to another.
   Fieldwork does not proceed rapidly or smoothly. For the most part,
you are a hostage to other people’s schedules. You can expect delays of
several days to several weeks between the time you request an appoint-
ment and the appointment date—and even longer if your informant
eventually breaks the appointment and reschedules it for a few weeks
later. (Sometimes it seems that research is mainly idle waiting!) This
problem is particularly acute if delay in seeing one informant becomes
a bottleneck to seeing others. To minimize idleness, it is a good idea to
have two or three independent streams of interviewing running simul-
taneously, so that a bottleneck in any single stream cannot halt your
work altogether.

Cultivating Access
Securing repeated access to an individual or agency presents different
problems from securing a one-time-only appointment. Courtesy is of
almost no use here; the political motive, conversely, is critical. Since the
political impact of your work on certain individuals and organizations
will almost certainly be adverse, some doors will inevitably be closed to
you. Beyond a certain point, there is nothing to be done about them,
except to seek alternative means of entry. A perceived political affinity
helps, but not much. Repeated access depends, instead, on building per-
sonal rapport. This takes time, especially if you are not inclined to appear
more friendly and congenial than you really feel. Rapport follows most
of all from simple exposure. Think of yourself as an anthropologist who
has to spend several months living among the tribe you are studying
before being allowed to observe certain sacred rituals and practices.
   At the risk of sounding patronizing, I will nevertheless note here that
the researcher should observe the basic courtesies. Be on time. Dress
appropriately, which generally means with the same degree of formality
as the interviewee or just a little less. Be friendly without being overly
familiar or presumptuous. If you tape interviews—always a good idea, in
order to preserve a record—set up your equipment with minimal fuss
                                                      A S S E M B L I N G E V I D E N C E    9 3




and explain that the tapes are for your own reference only. State that you
will turn off the tape whenever the informant wishes you to do so.2
   Almost invariably, whoever actually assists you in collating and inter-
preting agency data will see himself as “doing you a favor,” regardless of
how insistent his superiors have been that he make his services freely and
generously available to you. As part of the protocol for such a “favor,” you
must reciprocate with expressions of gratitude for his “going out of his
way.” An even more cooperative informant might mail you a copy of a
speech she has recently given, knowing that it will be of interest to you.
Or she might see to it that you are put on the list of invitees to a banquet
at which you will be able to meet a number of potential informants in an
informal setting. To a certain extent, this sort of assistance can be encour-
aged simply by letting people know that it will be welcomed. It can be
facilitated by offering telephone and fax numbers or e-mail and postal
addresses where you can be reached or where messages can be left for
you. It may even be useful to have business cards printed with this infor-
mation; relative to other research expenses, this one is quite small and
can return high dividends.

Exhausting Access
Access can be exhausted, too, not just cultivated and built up. Whereas in
some cases repeated exposure helps the researcher to build rapport, in
others exposure simply tears it down. In the extreme instance, one expo-
sure is all the relationship will bear; this commonly occurs when the
informant is defensive or antagonistic, or when she is extremely busy and
cannot easily be imposed upon. Other instances are intermediate: the
informant is willing to grant two but not three interviews—or three but
not four. When you suspect that access to an informant may be exhaust-
ed relatively quickly, defer interviewing her until later in the research
process, principally because your accumulated knowledge will then sup-
port a more productive interview.
   Usually, deferring interviews with such informants inflicts no hardship
on the researcher, since in the earliest stages, research can be conducted by

2. If you come to sensitive material in the interview, remind the interviewee of your
earlier offer to turn off the tape recorder.
9 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




talking with the legion of lower-level officials and administrative assis-
tants, public relations officers, and so on. Potentially useful information
sources are to be found among retired officials and among agency officials
who are part of a dissident faction.3 These are rich sources at any time, but
they are especially valuable in the early stages of research when it seems
advantageous to defer your approach to more highly placed figures in the
political establishment.
   The researcher’s reputation is also susceptible to being exhausted. It
is perhaps not in danger of being lost, strictly speaking, so much as it is
vulnerable to being transformed into a liability. Instead of being thought
of as fair-minded, discreet, intelligent, and self-possessed, you may begin
to be regarded as a partisan, a tale-bearer, a dope, or a dupe. The best way
to avoid acquiring such an undesirable reputation is to eschew partisan-
ship and indiscretion and, as I have already indicated, to actually be intel-
ligent and self-possessed.

CONDUCTING A POLICY RESEARCH INTERVIEW
Policy research, in its completed form, becomes a political resource.
Whatever its merits or demerits as a piece of rational analysis, it
amounts to more than that. It may become a justification for certain
parties to attack others or to defend themselves against attack and,
hence, can be a weapon of persuasion in a war of propaganda. Although
the tone and format of published policy research are typically neutral
and disinterested, everyone recognizes that the research may be and
often is used for political purposes, either by the author or by others. As
a result, informants are highly sensitive to the political implications of
whatever they tell you. How an informant treats you depends in large
part on how she thinks your work will be brought to bear on her per-
sonal or political interests.
   Being wary of the possible political implications of what they might
reveal, informants may be reluctant to talk freely and honestly. You should
assume that all interviewees confront this problem, even though you may


3. My former Goldman School colleague William Niskanen relates that colonels
twice passed over for promotion to general were a favored source for civilian policy
analysts like himself in the U.S. Defense Department.
                                                  A S S E M B L I N G E V I D E N C E    9 5




not know to what degree. In more extreme cases, it may be necessary to
use various subtle kinds of leverage against the interviewee. Before turn-
ing to the problem in its most severe forms, though, I will sketch a basic
strategy for conducting policy research interviews in general.

Energizing and Steering the Conversation
The interview process is an interaction carried on between the informant
and yourself. In this process the principal source of energy should be the
informant. Your tasks are, first, to encourage the informant to talk and to
keep on talking, and, once a suitable momentum has been attained, to
steer, to redirect, to slow down, or to cross-examine.
    In addition to the political motivation, informants will talk because
they have a story to tell. It is safe to say that many politicians, administra-
tors, and important staff feel (correctly) that much of their best and most
valuable work, which is being done behind the scenes, is unnoticed and
underappreciated. They will be surprisingly eager to use you as their
conduit to the outside world. Some also want to make their “side of the
story” better understood than they think it is—and, if you haven’t heard
it from others yet, you may be surprised at how interesting it is.
    In most social science research involving interviews, it is assumed that
the interviewer is, as much as possible, a neutral instrument for recording
data emitted by the respondent. However, this is generally an inappropri-
ate model for policy research interviews. Here the informant assumes
that you as an interviewer are anything but a neutral instrument—and it
would be foolish for you to try to appear in such an ill-fitting disguise—
since the whole object of your research is to arrive at some policy recom-
mendations. Thus, you need not fear probing the informant with pro-
vocative and even argumentative questions or comments—or to answer
questions in return. Such exchanges can cause an informant to sharpen
her wits and tone up her memory, and they may raise her psychic metab-
olism sufficiently to infuse energy into the whole interview process. If
this is done with proper finesse, the informant will appreciate the stimu-
lation. Your finesse as an interviewer, of course, consists of being argu-
mentative without sounding (or being) closed-minded or hostile. It is a
good idea to introduce contentious remarks in such a way that the infor-
mant, should she wish to do so, can retreat gracefully from the matter at
9 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




hand into another topic—thus keeping her energy level up rather than
dropping into an embarrassed reticence.
   Most interviews are conducted at the informant’s place of work.
Sometimes, however, a more informal setting, such as a restaurant or
café, should be chosen. Your method of note-taking should be compati-
ble with such an informal setting—perhaps on the back of an envelope
handily stored in your pocket for just such occasions.
   Apart from energizing the informant, your other main function in the
interview process is to steer her onto topics of interest to you. How can
this be done?
   Sometimes you must interfere in the informant’s conversation stream
simply to reestablish your right to speak, temporarily slowing down the
informant without making her lose too much momentum. This can be
done by interrupting with a short string of easily answered factual ques-
tions pertaining to the subject matter she has been discussing. The con-
tent of these questions, or at least the last one in the string, should be
suitable to work as a transition to the next topic you have in mind.
Suppose, for example, that you are interviewing the integrated-social-
services coordinator in your county, who is telling you about her agency’s
relations with the county’s chief administrative officer (CAO). Having
heard enough on this subject, you now want to steer her onto her agency’s
current budget request to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD). The conversation might go like this:

    Informant:  . . . so you see we’ve had a devil of a fight with the
                CAO all the way. Maybe it’s not her fault, of course,
                the Board of Supervisors being so conservative and
                the CAO needing support for her reappointment . . .
    Researcher: [Interrupting] Yes, she is up for reappointment this
                year, isn’t she?
    Informant: Yes.
    Researcher: Well at least she doesn’t control your budget, does she?
    Informant: True enough.
    Researcher: But HUD does—and how are your relations with
                them? Do you get pretty much what you ask for from
                them, in the way of a budget, I mean?
                                                A S S E M B L I N G E V I D E N C E    9 7




   The point is not to disguise from the informant the fact that you are
trying to steer her away from one topic and onto another, although
sometimes this is desirable and should be attempted. The point is really
to help her move from one topic to another without having to lose
momentum or to feel awkward. Indeed, she will sometimes feel trapped
on a topic that she herself would prefer to leave, and your job at such
moments is to help her maneuver off the subject. If you cannot think of
where you wish to lead her next, just think of a subject that is not implau-
sible and that is not too demanding emotionally or intellectually. While
you go in slow motion through that topic, both you and the informant
will have a chance to collect your thoughts and feelings preparatory to
moving to the next matter of serious concern.
   Involving an informant in discussions of personalities is a delicate
matter. The informant must be reassured that you are not turning the
interview into a gossip session, that she is not a purveyor of gossip, and
that you are not a seeker of it. This can be done by first introducing the
name of the personality in a neutral, usually factual, context:

  Researcher: A few moments ago you mentioned the Southside
              Community Health League. Dr. Green has been head
              of that for about a year now—or is it two?
  Informant: Probably closer to two.
  Researcher: Maybe it just seems shorter because I remember
              Dr. Black, his predecessor, so vividly.
  Informant: Yes, Black was quite a leader there.
  Researcher: Seems people have been more critical of Green—
              though I have heard quite complimentary things
              from some sources.
  Informant: Yes, he’s pretty controversial. He’s certainly a competent
              administrator and has been pretty nice to us—though
              we deal mainly with his deputy, Mr. White.
  Researcher: How come?

  Thus the conversation is turned to personalities by a sequence of
small steps, in which each participant encourages the other and in which
both assume responsibility for whatever gossipy quality may eventually
9 8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




threaten to intrude. Since personalities are such a sensitive topic, it is
even a good idea to sprinkle your conversation with allusions to people
about whom you may have no desire to question the informant. When
you do want to pursue a discussion of a particular personality, this pro-
cedure makes the discussion seem less of a departure from the normal
course of topics.
   If the informant has unpleasant things to say about the personality
under discussion, you may want to take pains to establish your own
social, personal, and political distance from that individual. In the exam-
ple just given, for example, the researcher has referred to “Dr. Green”
rather than “Bill Green” and has indicated his distance by suggesting that
he is unfamiliar with certain particulars of Green’s career. If the infor-
mant has flattering things to say about the individual in question, you
may choose to follow a contrary course, though it is always a little risky
to appear very close to anybody, lest it arouse suspicions of partiality.

Leveraging the Defensive Informant
Occasionally you encounter an informant who is irrevocably committed
to a defensive posture, for whom “No comment” is the primary safeguard
and calculated evasion is the fallback position. Try to diagnose this prob-
lem very early in the interview and then reassess your goals for the inter-
view in light of it. Concentrate on gaining information about specific
questions that this informant is able to answer but that are probably not
answerable by any other source. Since so much of your energy will have
to go into cracking the informant’s defenses, focus on some very specific
objectives and begin to probe for them right away.
   Once these preliminary assessments are out of the way and the inter-
view has turned to specifics, the use of leverage is in order. First, let the
informant understand that you are aware of his defensive posture, and
signal that you do not intend to be put off by it. You might try to com-
municate that his defensiveness will not help him, that you know too
much already to be shunted aside, and that you have access to other
sources who have already told you much and to still others who will be
willing to tell you more. Indicate that information from these sources
may be more prejudicial to his interests than his own revelations would
be, and that he therefore has nothing to lose, and perhaps something to
                                               A S S E M B L I N G E V I D E N C E    9 9




gain, by giving honest answers. A certain amount of bluffing may some-
times be necessary, though this tactic carries obvious risks. It is always
better to actually know as much as you pretend to know, and to have
access to the sources you claim to have access to, than merely to bluff.
   Here is a sample of such an interview, with the head of a prominent
local insurance company whom the researcher is pressing hard:

  Researcher: One thing I’d like to get more information about is
              the problem insurance companies have writing
              policies for merchants in so-called ghetto areas.
  Informant: [Silence. Pause.]
  Researcher: I mean, there may be problems because these policies
              are risky business propositions.
  Informant: [Silence. Pause.]
  Researcher: People say they are risky, anyway. Do underwriters in
              this area consider them risky?
  Informant: I can’t really say for sure.
  Researcher: Well, some people in the Black Merchants Association
              claim that insurance companies won’t write policies
              for them at all, that they’ve been classed as
              “unacceptable risks.”
  Informant: I don’t really know—insurance writing is the science
              of risks, isn’t it?
  Researcher: [Decides that informant will provide no information
              on insurance industry doctrines or practices in general,
              or on the local underwriters in particular. Guesses that
              informant will be unwilling to discuss the doctrines or
              rules applied by his own company, and decides
              therefore to concentrate solely on gathering
              information about the practices of the informant’s
              company.] Perhaps I can clarify my question by being
              more concrete. In your own Bedrock Casualty
              Company, are applicants ever turned down because
              they are thought to be unacceptable risks?
  Informant: I can’t say for sure. I’m not that close to the operating
              details of our very large company.
1 0 0    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




    Researcher: Of course. [Signaling she will not be put off] You, or
                perhaps your secretary, could arrange for me to talk
                to someone at that level, though, couldn’t you?
                [Seeking a different leverage point] But tell me about
                the category of “unacceptable risks.” Does Bedrock
                Casualty tell its salespeople that the company will
                insure any premises provided the insured pays a high
                enough premium? [Shifting the terms of the question
                to throw informant off guard] Or is there a limit on
                how high a premium the company will set?
    Informant: Well, we do not like to charge exorbitant premiums,
                of course . . .
    Researcher: [Interrupting] So within the existing limits on
                premiums there might in fact be businesses too risky
                to insure—hence “unacceptable”? [Holding to
                offensive] How about cancellations? Has Bedrock
                canceled or refused to renew any policies of ghetto
                merchants even though they have not filed any claims
                recently? This is another thing the Black Merchants
                Association has been complaining about.
    Informant: [Deciding researcher knows more than he had
                thought and seeking preemptive protection against
                the Black Merchants Association’s allegations] Well,
                yes, we have canceled a few, in the more riot-prone
                areas, and refused to renew other policies in that area.
                We had no choice; we stood to lose a lot of money in
                case of any trouble.
    Researcher: [Graciously ignoring this “confession,” and trying to
                induce the informant to tell his side of the story] Of
                course, that’s quite understandable. I think most
                people recognize this problem. [Now taking aim on a
                single statistic, the proportion of all Bedrock policies
                in ghetto neighborhoods canceled or not renewed in
                the last two years] In the past, have you written many
                policies in that area?
                                            A S S E M B L I N G E V I D E N C E    1 0 1




  Informant: Yes, we’ve done quite a bit, in the past anyway.
  Researcher: You still do insure some business over there, don’t you?
  Informant: Yes, we do, though as I say, I’m not too close to the
              operating details . . .
  Researcher: [Interrupting] Could you estimate what proportion
              of your policy holders from, say, two years ago you
              continue to insure? Is it 80 percent, 20 percent? Just
              to give me some rough idea.
  Informant: Well, it would certainly be a lot closer to 80 than 20
              but I really don’t know.
  Researcher: [Deciding that this would be an interesting datum and
              that it is worth pursuing vigorously] Can we find out?
  Informant: Not easily. It’s not in any files anywhere in that form,
              and it would be awfully difficult to find out.
  Researcher: [Not believing that it would be very difficult,
              deciding to contribute her own labor to searching
              the files, if necessary, and resorting to a bluff]
              People have the impression that Bedrock is less
              inclined to write policies for ghetto merchants than
              other companies in this area. I don’t know where the
              facts come from—but I think some lawyers
              connected with the Black Merchants Association
              have been looking into legal aspects . . .
  Informant: What? I’m sure we are no worse, or different, than
              any other company in town! I’d like to see these
              so-called facts!
  Researcher: If I get any further clarification on that, I’d be happy
              to let you know. Meanwhile, I’d be willing to help out
              in whatever way you like in getting this information
              together concerning your own company’s record in
              this field.

   Let us interrupt this scene without a conclusion because, however it
turns out, the researcher has done the best she could. The president of
Bedrock Casualty may deliver the information sought, or he may not.
1 0 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




Good interviewing strategy and tactics do not guarantee success, espe-
cially when the odds are weighted against the researcher to begin with.4
    One common ploy used by a defensive informant is to reel off masses
of irrelevant statistics and facts, which can easily swamp a naively data-
worshipping researcher. Another ploy is to ramble garrulously about side
issues, while running out the clock on whatever time limit has been set
for the interview. Your best defense against these evasive tactics is to be
able to recognize them for what they are.
    If your own leverage fails—and if the elusive information is sufficient-
ly important to you—you may be able to use someone else’s. A graduate
student researcher may have little leverage with determinedly defensive
bureaucrats, for instance, but a legislator, or her staff assistant, will almost
certainly have more. Hence, as a last resort, you might persuade a sympa-
thetic legislator to help out. Sometimes a newspaper reporter or an estab-
lished group can be of assistance. The local medical society, for example,
may be able to get information from the county hospital administrator
about hospital policies that no academic researcher—and perhaps not
even a county supervisor—could get.
    A significant constraint on using leverage is the desirability of main-
taining cordial relations with whatever agency or individual is being
pressured, for you run a clear risk of alienating the objects of your lever-
aging tactics. With respect to a given study, this problem can be miti-
gated by postponing the more offensive tactics until relatively late, when
the study is less vulnerable to being undermined by the offended party.
The problem is more difficult, however, when you envision a long-term
relationship—lasting well beyond the conclusion of the present research

4. The researcher’s bluffing tactic in this scene is of debatable morality. Although I
believe it would be unethical in most circumstances, there are occasions when it can
be justified. This is one of them. In this case, the Bedrock president seeks to withhold
proprietary information. Does he have a right to do so? Normally, yes. But this right
has to be weighed against the injustice of depriving ghetto merchants of a nearly
essential prerequisite for doing business when they might be perfectly willing to
meet reasonable price terms for acquiring the insurance (perhaps with government
or philanthropic assistance). The researcher here has an arguable right to try to com-
bat this injustice. Given that right, does she also have the right to use deception? The
use of explicit deception on the part of the researcher is balanced by the use of
implicit (covert) deception on the part of the insurance company’s president.
                                                A S S E M B L I N G E V I D E N C E    1 0 3




effort—with the agency or individual under scrutiny. Certain informa-
tion may have to be sacrificed in order to preserve a modicum of good-
will for the future.

USING LANGUAGE TO CHARACTERIZE AND CALIBRATE
The basic medium of the interview is spoken language embedded in a
conversational context. Such a medium, when used as a representational
device, presents reliability and validity issues (in psychometric terms).

Semantic Tip The simplest issue—to see, though not necessarily to
resolve—involves the language of characterization. If an informant says,
“Yes, this is a frustrating job,” you have to interpret both the nature and
intensity of the word frustrating, and do so in a way that permits you to
calibrate the result against some larger frame or benchmark. This can be
done by asking a series of questions designed to do the calibrating. One
shortcut is to start by offering up your own characterization and see how
the informant reacts to it: “If I had this job, I would find it awfully frus-
trating, I think.” This quickly establishes a benchmark of some kind—
“awfully frustrating”—for you and the informant to use. Of course, there
is the problem of knowing whether you and your informant mean the
same thing by the expression, since your frustration thresholds may dif-
fer. But you’re off to a good start.
   An improvement on the previous example would be to create two such
benchmarks—that is, to describe a whole continuum with anchors at
both ends and perhaps a verbal midpoint. For example: “Would you say
that your reaction to proposal X was extremely skeptical—as I’ve inferred
from what you already have said—or was it relatively favorable. . . . or was
it maybe ‘wait-and-see’?” This approach has the added advantage of
respecting virtually any position your informant holds and of communi-
cating your willingness to find anchoring words based in the informant’s
own history. Or you could anchor one or both ends in what “other
people” have supposedly been saying.
   To be sure, by characterizing the available options in this way, you are
putting words into other people’s heads and sometimes into their
mouths. Before you proposed “extremely skeptical,” your informant may
never have thought of the proposal in this way, and so you run the risk,
1 0 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




by asking the question, of having created such a thought out of thin air.
But that risk comes from using language as a medium; it can’t be avoided.
Even when you use the ostensibly neutral and clinical language that sur-
vey researchers and reporters use, you are putting words into people’s
heads and mouths. More provocative characterizations, when used as
benchmarks, are on a logical par with the more neutral alternatives
offered by survey instruments and professional journalists.

PROTECTING CREDIBILITY
Like social science research, policy research is eventually subject to criti-
cism on intellectual grounds. But unlike social science research, it is even
more vulnerable on political grounds and, indeed, is vulnerable to attack
by the very subjects of the study. In social science research, the subjects
rarely become significant critics of the product, but in policy research
their criticism is inevitable. Therefore, the researcher should take steps to
protect the ultimate political credibility of his work from politically
motivated as well as strictly intellectual attack.

Defending against Politically Inspired Criticism
In contrast to that of social science research, the primary goal of policy
research is not intellectual enlightenment (either yours or that of your pro-
fessional colleagues), although enlightenment is inevitably a by-product.
Instead, the goal is to improve your understanding of a policy problem,
and of possible means of coping with it, to the point at which it becomes
possible to advocate a responsible course of action. Thus, policy research
takes aim at broad and complex phenomena, and so it is typically satisfied
with very gross approximations of “truth,” in contrast to social science
research, which typically seeks more refined interpretations of narrowly
circumscribed problems. The gross and approximate character of policy
research is an open invitation to politically inspired criticism. How can
you, as the researcher, protect yourself?
   For one thing, you should attempt to touch base with any party (or
any institutional interest) who might later try to undermine the report by
claiming to have been ignored. Indeed, it is a good idea to preempt such
claims by quoting that party in the report, as evidence of a sort that the
                                               A S S E M B L I N G E V I D E N C E    1 0 5




party’s views were taken into account. For instance, if you are going to
recommend alterations in the way superintendents are selected in a given
school district, it would be best to interview representatives from the
local association of school administrators and from the local chapters of
the National Education Association and the American Federation of
Teachers. Spokespersons for these groups may have interesting opinions
to contribute to the research project, but even if they do not, by consult-
ing them you gain protection against their criticisms should they decide
to oppose the recommendations in your report. It may even be useful to
send out a preliminary copy of the report to these interests for reviews.
    Second, you should seek out “experts” or others with political or intel-
lectual authority to whom you can attribute views, opinions, estimates,
and so on, about which you feel especially uncertain. Quoting published
sources is one way of making such attributions, and including quotations
from interviews is another. In addition, you should line up experts who
will be willing to speak up in support of your work once it becomes pub-
lic. Sources who are quoted in the report as having a view on this or that
subject become natural targets for inquiring journalists or political deci-
sion makers; these sources have an incentive to defend their quoted views
when questioned.
    Third, you should pay special attention to potential opponents and
identify which propositions they are likely to attack. These target points
should be bolstered in advance by expert quotations, and some polite
reference should be made to the existence of counterarguments—with-
out giving them too much space or prominence. The very opponents
who can be expected to raise objections later should be quoted, to defuse
any claims that their arguments or positions were ignored. (There may
be additional psychological advantages to the balanced or two-sided pre-
sentation, simply as a subtly persuasive form of propaganda directed at
the reader.)
    Statistics can be useful for buttressing credibility. Employed for this
purpose, they play a documentary rather than an informational role.
Statistics can document the validity of generalizations that political oppo-
nents might otherwise challenge, even though their truth is abundantly
evident through more impressionistic sources.
1 0 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




Preparing for Premature Exposure
Politicians and policy researchers work on different timetables. The for-
mer often call for “results” well before the research is in any sense finished.
Even when no one demands it, however, unexpected opportunities often
do present themselves before your research work is close enough to being
finished that you can seize the auspicious moment to present your results.
   One possible strategy is to map out (as much as possible) the timeta-
ble of potential political demands and to arrange your research timetable
in at least partial correspondence. Another strategy is to prepare yourself
as soon as possible with answers to the crudest kinds of questions that
might be asked of you. Since these are generally the kinds of answers
politicians need and want anyway, you may as well formulate them early
in the course of your research. Finally, it is important, early on, to line up
your supporting experts, as well as to touch base with potential oppo-
nents. Since, once again, these contacts must be made eventually, there is
good reason to make them sooner rather than later.

STRATEGIC DILEMMAS OF POLICY RESEARCH
By way of summary and conclusion, let us consider the question: Which
informants should be approached when? Answering this question forces
a useful review of most of the issues discussed earlier.
   We may divide the “when” part of the question into “relatively early”
and “relatively late” in the course of the research project. Approach the
following informants relatively early:

    • Persons who are likely to facilitate your search for rich information
      sources
    • Powerful persons who directly or by your reputed connection with
      them will facilitate your access to sources
    • Knowledgeable persons who will provide you with the information
      you need to hedge against premature political exposure of your
      work, and whose information will contribute to your capacity to
      exert leverage against defensive interviewees
    • Friendly experts who will contribute to your political credibility in
      case of premature political exposure
                                               A S S E M B L I N G E V I D E N C E    1 0 7




  • Potential opponents with whom you touch base in order to hedge
    against premature political exposure

Approach these informants relatively late:

  • Hostile or defensive informants against whose tactics a prior build-
    up of leverage is desirable
  • Busy informants to whom you might lose access permanently once
    you have seen them, or about whom you are not sufficiently informed
    to interview early
  • Potential opponents, especially if powerful, who might try to fore-
    stall your access to others and thereby cripple your research efforts
  • Administrators who have knowledge of potential trouble spots but
    who will be unwilling to point them out until it appears to be in
    their self-interest

   There is one obvious contradiction between these two lists—approach
potential opponents early and late—and several others that are not quite
so obvious. Often the busy and the defensive informants are also in the
best position to facilitate the search for sources, open doors, and provide
useful information. Top agency administrators, for instance, may have
plentiful experience with the policy problem under investigation and
may be able to provide easy access to sources, but they also have a vested
interest in maintaining the status quo or something very close to it. In
any event, they may not take kindly to having their activities scrutinized
too carefully by an outsider. Other similar examples can easily be called
to mind. There is in principle no way to reconcile these incompatible
prescriptions of whom to approach early and whom late. You will have to
consider the full details of your particular situation and then balance the
risks and rewards inherent in any given choice. There is no way of avoid-
ing such trade-offs; you should simply make them consciously rather
than inadvertently.
                                                                       PART




“SMART (BEST) PRACTICES” RESEARCH:
                                                                III
UNDERSTANDING AND MAKING USE
OF WHAT LOOK LIKE GOOD IDEAS
FROM SOMEWHERE ELSE




I t is only sensible to see what kinds of solutions have been tried in other
  jurisdictions, agencies, or locales. You want to look for those that appear
to have worked pretty well, try to understand exactly how and why they
may have worked, and evaluate their applicability to your own situation.1
In many circles this process is known as “best practices research.” Simple
and commonsensical as this process sounds, it presents many method-
ological and practical pitfalls. The most important of these is relying on
anecdotes and on very limited empirical observations for your ideas. To
some extent, these are—one hopes—supplemented by smart theorizing.
This method is never perfectly satisfactory, but in the real world the alter-
native is not usually more empiricism but, rather, no or thoughtless theo-
rizing. Part III helps you to avoid the pitfalls and offers tips on how to get
the most payoff from your search for best practices.

DEVELOP REALISTIC EXPECTATIONS
Semantic Tip First, don’t be misled by the word best in so-called best
practices research. Rarely will you have any confidence that some helpful-
looking practice is actually the best among all those that address the same

1. Readers interested in a more social scientific exposition of many of the points in
Part III should consult Bardach 2004.
                                                                                 109
1 1 0    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




problem or opportunity. The extensive and careful research needed to
document a claim of “best” will almost never have been done. Usually, you
will be looking for what, more modestly, might be called “good practices.”
   But even this claim may be too grand. Often you can’t be sure that what
appears to be a good practice is even solving or ameliorating the problem
to which it is nominally addressed. On closer inspection, a supposedly
good practice may not be solving the problem at all. Inadequate measure-
ment, plus someone’s rose-colored glasses, was simply producing the illu-
sion of problem mitigation. It may also turn out that, even if good effects
have truly occurred, the allegedly good practice had little or nothing to do
with producing them. All these are known technically as internal validity
problems. The discussion that follows assumes such problems have been
satisfactorily—though not perfectly—resolved and concentrates only on
the external validity problem of extrapolating from a setting in which a
good practice has indeed worked well to settings that differ in little-
understood but important ways may lead to weak, perverse, or otherwise
damaging results.

ANALYZE SMART PRACTICES
A “practice” is a tangible and visible behavior. When you can ask a pro-
gram manager what her practice is in addressing some problem, she can
answer with a description of what she does. Typically, though, a practice
is also an expression of some underlying idea—an idea about how the
actions entailed by the practice work to solve a problem or achieve a goal.
Some such ideas are particularly clever, and I shall explain further what I
mean by this. The practices that embody them I call “smart practices.”

Finding the Free Lunches
One way of being clever is by getting something for nothing. Contrary to
the dictum that there is no such thing as a free lunch, creative policymak-
ers and policy implementers invest quite a lot of energy in looking for
just such comestibles. Often, they are successful. To understand how this
can be, consider the free lunch cornucopia produced by the natural sci-
ences and engineering. The energy stored in the chemical bonds in a
cup of gasoline can run a car for a few miles if only you know how to
access that energy and channel it. Pulleys and levers supply mechanical
                                     “ S M A R T ( B E S T ) P R A C T I C E S ” R E S E A R C H    1 1 1




advantage. Bacteria happily eat and destroy the organic crud in a city’s
wastewater almost for free. All these materials, devices, and conditions
amount to getting a lot of “something” for nothing or for relatively little.
The source of all these boons is simply Mother Nature.
   In the social world, the sources of something for nothing are usually
less tangible and less directly gifts of Mother Nature, but they are no less
real. The “invisible hand” of the market creates social value where once
there was only individual pursuit of self-interest, and, metaphorically at
least, it operates without charge. Alphabetical ordering permits people to
find information in a fraction of the time it would have taken had there
been no such ordering. Queuing at bus stops is easy to understand and
usually fair, and it makes life better for everybody.
   In the world of policy and management, there are no doubt fewer and
less delectable free (or nearly free) lunches than in the marketplace or in
an information storage facility or at a bus stop. But they are there. All the
“opportunities” described in Box I-1 (p. 8) have this latent potential to
generate something of public value relatively cheaply. (On the nature of
“public value,” see Moore 1996.) You might say that the difference
between the (high) value created and the (low) cost, and risk, of produc-
ing it represents a free lunch.2
   Opportunities don’t deliver up their latent value without some addi-
tional work, however. This work is done by practices that take advantage
of their potentialities, and these practices typically cost something and
are subject to various vulnerabilities, as well. However, the smarter these
practices are, the more value they can manage to extract at lower cost
and risk.
   The following list offers some examples of candidates for smart practice
status—candidates, that is, because to my knowledge they have not been
subjected to the extensive empirical testing needed to confirm such status:

   • A “high-expectations” welfare-to-work program. Implemented in the
     early 1990s, the Greater Avenues to Independence (GAIN) program
     I studied in Riverside County, California, was a prototype for the


2. Risks come in several varieties; see the section in Part III, below, titled “Describe
Generic Vulnerabilities.”
1 1 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




      1996 federal welfare reform act. Unlike most other welfare-to-work
      programs, the Riverside program set high expectations about work
      for GAIN participants in two senses. In many different ways, it sig-
      naled to participants that program staff had confidence in (high
      expectations of) their ultimate success in getting a job and getting
      off welfare. This confidence was intended as an antidote to many
      participants’ low self-esteem, and consequent low effort to reattach
      themselves to the labor force. Staff also signaled—and expressed in
      program rules about early and diligent job search, as well as through
      a variety of formal and informal pressures—that “society expected”
      welfare participants to shape up and take responsibility for their
      own financial well-being. The Riverside GAIN program designed its
      recruitment, training, performance appraisal, and other administra-
      tive systems to support this high-expectations philosophy (Bardach
      1997). In effect, the high-expectations model took advantage of the
      natural energy to solve their own problems that program managers
      assumed to be latent in the program participants.
    • Reading One-to-One. This tutoring program for children in grades
      1–3 who have fallen far behind in learning to read English was cre-
      ated by George Farkas, at the time, of the social sciences faculty of the
      University of Texas at Arlington. It was first tried out in Dallas and
      then spread to Houston and a number of other cities. The program
      involves systematic instruction in phonemic awareness, one-to-one
      tutoring by a well-trained tutor, and highly structured feedback and
      supervision. Like all phonemics-based programs, it recognizes that
      English orthography does not map sounds in a systematic or logical
      way and that it is at some point necessary for learners to master the
      decoding and encoding rules actually in use. It takes advantage of the
      fact that children’s early failures in reading that come from neglect of
      phonemic awareness are reversible by regular tutoring. It also takes
      advantage of the emotional bonding that comes from the one-to-one
      tutoring relationship and of the increased motivation after the stu-
      dent experiences some successes. The simplicity and systematization
      of the teaching materials, teaching methods, and administrative over-
      sight system make the program easily replicable and keep the costs
      relatively low (Farkas 1998).
                                “ S M A R T ( B E S T ) P R A C T I C E S ” R E S E A R C H    1 1 3




  • Sharing maintenance responsibilities for a neighborhood park between
    the local parks department and the residents of the neighborhood.
    Nonprofit organizations often spring up to provide services of a
    nonstandard sort not provided by the public agency (e.g., same-sex
    schools, abortion clinics). An extension of this basic idea is a part-
    nership in which the public sector supplies certain resources that
    are not only supplementary but also complementary. In many a
    setting, the city government provides the parkland and the neigh-
    bors provide some or all of the labor to make the land more service-
    able in some way. This practice takes advantage of two interesting
    potentialities: the potential for gains from trade between two par-
    ties, and the use of what is in effect bartering, in a situation where
    there are administrative and political barriers to organizing the
    transaction in cash.
  • The “expenditure control” budget. Adopted first in the city of Fairfield,
    California, this practice was publicized by David Osborne and Ted
    Gaebler (1992) in their influential book, Reinventing Government. As
    originally conceived and implemented, this budgeting strategy gave
    each department the same basic mission and the same budget as in
    the previous year (with an inflation adjustment) but abolished the
    line-item specification of expenditures, permitting the department to
    keep any savings and reinvest them in other mission-related activi-
    ties. This approach took advantage of the superior technical and
    operational knowledge of program implementers relative to that of
    elected officials and bureaucrats in fiscal-control agencies.
  • Milestone payments to nonprofit service contractors. In 1992 the
    Oklahoma Department of Rehabilitation Services began paying non-
    profit contractors for meeting rehabilitation milestones, defined in
    performance terms, that mental health clients could achieve en route
    to higher levels of employability.3 The clients participated in assessing
    whether the milestones had been met, and the contractors helped
    to define generic milestones and other aspects of the program.


3. This program was a 1997 finalist in the Ford Foundation/Kennedy School of
Government (KSG) Innovations in American Government competition. My source
for information about it was the Innovations program files.
 1 1 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




       The milestone system also permitted contractors to claim reimburse-
       ment from the state on a more accelerated schedule than they had
       previously been able to do, thereby taking advantage of the power of
       self-interest to motivate better performance from the nonprofits. It
       also provided greater transparency than more traditional fee-for-
       service arrangements, under which the funding agency did not know
       much about the quality of the service provided.
     • A cooperative project between rehabilitation and recycling programs.
       Hennepin County, Minnesota, arranged for mentally disabled cli-
       ents of the county vocational rehabilitation program to sort and
       recycle discarded auto batteries, an item of concern to the county’s
       environmental management agency.4 The two programs thus took
       advantage of production complementarities between human and
       physical “assets” that they could deploy.

Semantic Tip I have made a point, in describing supposedly smart prac-
 tices, of saying that each practice “takes advantage” of something. This is
 a linguistic device for ensuring that, in analyzing how the practice works,
 we focus on how the practice aims to exploit, or take advantage of, some
 latent opportunity for creating value on the cheap.

 Breaking Loose from Conventions and Assumptions
 Another way of being clever is not so much technical—finding those free
 lunches—as ideological and psychological. It involves disrespecting con-
 ventional boundaries. In the world of public policy and management,
 this practice sometimes involves challenging assumptions that are
 anchored in value commitments. For example, since the late 1980s we
 have begun to shake loose the assumption that just because some good
 or service is “good for the community” and ought to be financed
 through taxation, it ought also to be produced or delivered by government
 employees. Instead, we now contemplate contracting out to the nonprofit
 or even the profit-seeking sectors such traditionally “governmental” func-
 tions as primary education, correctional institution construction and

 4. This project was a Ford/KSG semifinalist. See Borins 1998, 200; also, I had per-
 sonal communication with Hennepin County program managers.
                                   “ S M A R T ( B E S T ) P R A C T I C E S ” R E S E A R C H    1 1 5




management, and welfare-to-work programming.5 In this case, we are
challenging the assumption that governmental provision necessarily
embodies a social expression of the value of community. Taxpayer financ-
ing may do so, but governmental provision does not.
   Another value-oriented smart practice may be to simply articulate the
values that underlie a program and make it effective. Riverside’s high-
expectations welfare-to-work model, for instance, was one of relatively
few programs prior to the mid-1990s that decided it was proper to articu-
late the value premises that underlay its approach to case management.

OBSERVE THE PRACTICE
In free-lunch-type situations, we can say that the smart practice is “what-
ever takes advantage of—or exploits—the latent opportunity to create
value on the cheap.”6 But let us try to say more about how to characterize
this “whatever.”

Characterizing the Features of a Smart Practice
The basic mechanism in a smart practice is its means of directly accom-
plishing useful work in a cost-effective manner. A smart practice is made
up of (1) the latent potential for creating value (from Box I-1, for instance),
plus (2) the mechanism for extracting and focusing that potential. In the
six examples described earlier, I indicated the basic mechanisms by saying
what each of the practices “takes advantage of.” For instance, the shared
maintenance for parks takes advantage of potential gains from trade and
the opportunity to use barter as a substitute for cash payment.
   But there is more to a smart practice than this basic mechanism
(Bardach 2004). Some characteristic secondary features of a smart prac-
tice are the following:

   • Implementing features, which directly embody the basic mechanism.
     In the Oklahoma milestones case, for instance, they are the pay-
     ment schedule, payment amounts, and payment conditions. In the

5. Whether or not contracting-out is a smart practice, it is highly controversial,
I might add.
6. With minor adjustments, the same analysis can also be applied to practices whose
“smartness” derives from their departure from convention.
 1 1 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




       Hennepin County recycling/rehabilitation program they are the
       stock of recyclable materials, the pool of mentally disabled clients,
       and the interagency understandings that link them.
     • Supportive features, which are primarily those resources used to
       bring the implementing features into being—for instance, a budget
       and an institutional structure. Other supportive features that have a
       less directly instrumental role but may nevertheless be important
       might include the culture of the organization or the broader politi-
       cal environment.
     • Optional features, or those that just happen to be of interest to actors
       in the site where the practice is observed but may not necessarily be
       valued elsewhere. For instance, in the Oklahoma milestones case, the
       feature that allows vendors to participate in the design of the pro-
       gram seems to me optional—although nice!

 Distinguishing Functions and Features
Semantic Tip In adapting a seemingly smart practice from a “source site”
 for application at a “target site,” you want to be rigorous in replicating the
 logic—the “how”—of the basic mechanism, while leaving maximum
 flexibility as to the specific means to carry it out. To do this, distinguish
 between the functions involved in getting the mechanism to work and the
 particular features that embody those functions. For instance, in the
 milestones program, the functions include setting the milestones and
 verifying the claims of achievement. These actions are part of the defin-
 ing logic of the practice—they cannot be omitted without changing the
 very essence of the program. However, exactly what features are chosen
 to implement these functions or to support the implementation strategy
 is another matter. With regard to the high-expectations welfare-to-work
 program, two essential functions are creating a moral climate: favoring
 responsibility and instilling self-confidence that such responsibility can
 be met. Exactly what design features should be chosen to implement and
 support these functions is a more open-ended question, though.

Semantic Tip Here is a linguistic hint to help you separate features and
 functions: Functions should be formulated as gerunds, verb-like nouns
 ending in “ing”—as in the actions defined above as setting, verifying,
                                    “ S M A R T ( B E S T ) P R A C T I C E S ” R E S E A R C H    1 1 7




creating, and instilling—while the features that perform these functions
can be indicated by pure nouns.
   An exception to this principle of formulating functional language
arises when you really need or want to specify a particular method for
carrying out a function. In the milestones case, for instance, you might
intentionally refer to a contract as a specific means of defining expecta-
tions among the parties and to documents as a means of attesting that
the milestones have been met.

Allowing for Variation and Complexity
Because smart practices are internally complex, context-sensitive, and
capable of being used by different parties to pursue slightly different bun-
dles of goals, how we talk about them should reflect these qualities.

Characterization should be generic and flexible, not prescriptive and
overly precise.   Consider the expenditure control budget described ear-
lier. Does the practice there require giving all the savings back to the
department, or would, say, 50 percent qualify? If the basic idea is to pro-
vide incentives to spend wisely, returning 50 percent may suffice.
Probably the best characterization, therefore, would be “allowing the
department to retain enough of the savings for its staff to feel motivated
to create the savings in the first place.”7 It would then be up to whoever
implements the expenditure control budget to determine what “enough”
means in the local context.
    It should be left to local implementers to figure out the details of the
generic practice that make sense in their own context. Allowing for local
adaptation of nonessential features not only serves common sense but also
encourages greater buy-in by the locals to a practice that in some sense is
being imported from elsewhere or, worse yet, imposed from outside.

Characterization of the basic mechanism of a smart practice is not nec-
essarily simple; it can be complex.   My list of examples of candidate
smart practices included only relatively simple practices, so as not to cause


7. This interpretation is asserted by the researcher-observer; it is not necessarily
something that has been done in practice or endorsed by any practitioners.
1 1 8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




confusion. However, some smart practices are multifaceted, and thus not
easy to summarize in a few sentences or even paragraphs. Michael
Barzelay analyzed what he called the “postbureaucratic paradigm” for
managing statewide overhead and control functions in Minnesota state
government. He considered trying to reduce the many aspects of this
postbureaucratic paradigm—which I would also call a smart practice,
albeit a very large one—to a few “core ideas” such as service, customer
focus, quality, incentives, creating value, and empowerment. However, he
concluded, “the major concepts . . . are not organized hierarchically, with
one master idea at the top,” but are instead arrayed as “an extended fam-
ily of ideas” (Barzelay 1992, 115–117).
    A related management reform paradigm, called by many the “new
public management” (NPM), emerged in New Zealand in the mid-1980s
as another such extended family of ideas and practices. Noting that it “is
not reducible to a few sentences, let alone a slogan,” one observer (Borins
1998, 9) goes on to state its key ideas, as follows:

    • Government should provide high-quality services that citizens value.
    • The autonomy of public managers, particularly from central agency
      controls, should be increased.
    • Organizations and individuals should be evaluated and rewarded
      on the basis of how well they meet demanding performance targets.
    • Managers must be assured that the human and technological
      resources they need to perform well will be available to them.
    • Public-sector managers must appreciate the value of competition
      and maintain an open-minded attitude about which services belong
      in the private, rather than the public, sector.

Specimens of a smart practice in the real world look rather different from
one another and require careful interpretation.   You should try to find
multiple exemplars, or specimens, of a smart practice to get a sense of its
robustness and efficacy when (1) it is being implemented under different
supportive (or antagonistic) conditions, (2) it comes with different option-
al features attached, and (3) it employs supposedly equivalent but never-
theless somewhat different means to perform the required functions.
Ideally, you would be able to find social scientific evaluation studies of
                                 “ S M A R T ( B E S T ) P R A C T I C E S ” R E S E A R C H    1 1 9




practices that supply both data and theoretical interpretation regarding
such matters. In most cases, however, such evaluations will not exist.
Normally—or perhaps at best—you will find writings or speeches by prac-
titioners describing successes in a few places, accompanied by only sketchy
descriptions of what was done or the difficulties of implementation. You
will need to think very hard and reason very carefully about how you want
to conceptualize (that is, define) the smart practice of interest and to assess
the support requirements you think are most important. You need to do
this even before you get to thinking about how the practice might work in
the particular context(s) you have in mind (see the later discussion of this
point under “But Will It Work Here?”).

DESCRIBE GENERIC VULNERABILITIES
It should be part of standard professional practice in describing smart
practices to explain not only how and why they work but also how and
why they fail, collapse, backfire, and generally make people sorry they
ever tried them. That is, we should be told the nature of their generic
vulnerabilities. A generic vulnerability is a potential weakness of the prac-
tice that is somehow connected with its basic causal structure. It may
have to do with a high sensitivity to small errors in execution, or with the
environment in which the practice is being implemented (e.g., an envi-
ronment that imposes certain insupportable stresses).
   Of course, all political and implementation environments are stressful
to a certain degree, and we can reasonably include in the definition of a
particular smart practice those features necessary to safeguard it against
the more predictable and potentially damaging stresses. Without such
safeguards, an otherwise smart practice can become a very dumb prac-
tice. For instance, although privatizing certain municipal service func-
tions is a smart practice when would-be private suppliers operate in a
competitive market, it might become a very dumb practice under these
circumstances: (1) if it were carried out in an environment monopolized by
a single supplier; (2) if the bidding process were very corruptible, and cor-
rupt interests were to discover this fact; (3) if inappropriate performance
measures were stipulated in the contract; or (4) if the municipal contract
management procedures were overly rigid or overly lax. To take another
example, a high-expectations welfare-to-work program is vulnerable to
1 2 0    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




the condition of the local labor market: if unemployment is high and
jobs are scarce, high expectations may produce in participants more
defeatism about themselves and more cynicism about the “responsi-
bility” that society is urging on them. A government/neighborhood
partnership for park maintenance is, in a generic sense, vulnerable to,
among other things, temptations on the part of policymakers to slowly
shift more and more of the burden onto the neighbors while reallocating
budgetary funds to other departments.
    Generic vulnerabilities are only the potential for trouble, it should be
remembered. Whether the troubles materialize depends on the nature
of the local environment in which the smart practice is implemented
and on the success of various parties who are aware of the vulnerabili-
ties in designing and implementing successful countermeasures.
Contracting processes, for instance, can be designed to minimize cor-
ruption, albeit at some cost. And neighbors entering into a partnership
with the city regarding parks maintenance can insist on putting the
terms of the partnership in writing and holding a well-publicized press
conference to announce them. Even if such a document had no legal
standing, it might give neighborhood representatives some useful
political leverage in later years.
    Two particular types of vulnerability are especially worth attending to.
One pertains to likely failures of general management capacity—such as
a low general level of leadership talent or the lack of a “good government”
ethos that would make it easier to implement this or any other practice
successfully. The other pertains to weaknesses intrinsic to the particular
practice itself—such as a service delivery program’s susceptibility to con-
flict over whether to give priority to this or that catchment area or needy
subpopulation, or a safety-oriented regulatory program’s inability to
determine whether to err on the side of injury-tolerant leniency or
costly stringency.

BUT WILL IT WORK HERE?
Assuming that you have sufficiently understood the essence of the
generic smart practice, including its generic vulnerabilities, and have
mapped the variety of supportive features that could increase its odds of
success, in the end, you must still ask: “Assuming that this practice is indeed
                                “ S M A R T ( B E S T ) P R A C T I C E S ” R E S E A R C H    1 2 1




smart in some contexts, is ours a context in which it can work well
enough to warrant trying it?” Answering this question intelligently
entails looking both at the source contexts, where the practice appears
to have worked well, and at your own target context, where it is being
considered for adoption.

Assessing the Target Context
Within your target context, a careful assessment of the present situation
is in order, of course, but a static answer based on this assessment is not
enough. You need to think also about what might be done at reasonable
cost or risk to improve the prospects of the smart practice in the target
context, were it to be implemented there. These actions fall into the fol-
lowing two categories:

  • Safeguarding strategies. Consider the generic vulnerabilities of the
    smart practice: are the most dangerous of them likely to cause
    unacceptable trouble in your context? For instance, if excessive
    rigidity in the contract management process is a generic vulnerabil-
    ity of partnering with a nonprofit agency, are your contract man-
    agement institutions known to be unusually rigid? And if so, is
    there anything you can do to offset this problem? Might you, for
    instance, find someone in the contract management bureau who
    can serve as a special protector and expediter? Or, if you cannot do
    that, can you find some way to structure the contract terms so that
    the contractor is held accountable for achieving general results
    rather than for following specific procedures?
  • Enhancement strategies. Consider what I called earlier the “sup-
    portive features” that can help a practice to work better: What
    supportive features will be put into play? How well are they likely
    to perform? Can you do anything to improve them? For instance,
    can you attract top-notch personnel to manage this program or
    undertake this project? Can you obtain more stable funding than
    annual appropriations? Can you mobilize the press to take positive
    notice of what you are doing? Can you count on the support of key
    stakeholders and relevant political constituencies—or at least on
    weak action from opponents?
1 2 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




Evaluating the Source Contexts
If you have to search very hard for smart practices that might be usable
in your own situation, the chances are that such practices are not wide-
spread. This means that the specimens you locate will come from juris-
dictions, agencies, or locales where policymakers and administrators
tend to look more favorably on novelty and innovation than is usually
the case. Hence, their overall managerial capacity may be better than
average—and perhaps better than the one in your own locale.
   If the source contexts are largely pilot or demonstration programs, you
need to be particularly cautious, because (1) pilot program implementers
often bring more enthusiasm and talent to bear on their work than the
average program implementers, and enthusiasm and talent count for
something; (2) the political and financial conditions at the pilot sites are
probably more favorable (or less unfavorable) than those at the average
site; and (3) bureaucratic resistance to a pilot program is typically less
intense than to a permanent change that threatens existing values, status,
job security, or work routines.
   How cautious should you be in extrapolating from successes observed
in pilot or demonstration contexts? No systematic research exists to
answer this question. However, a RAND Corporation analysis of a variety
of juvenile crime prevention programs discounted the effectiveness levels
attained in the pilot contexts by 15–40 percent when estimating a “scaling
up penalty” that would apply when implementing the programs on a
wide scale (Greenwood et al. 1995). Although the RAND analysts offered
no explicit reasoning for choosing the penalty factors that they did, their
choices do seem reasonable.
   If you are analyzing the possibility of implementing a smart practice not
just in some known local context but on a wide scale, you should be con-
cerned about more than the fact that pilot program results may be much
better than average. You should also be concerned about the existence of
many below-average sites where the smart practice would be implemented—
some of them perhaps quite a bit below average. In an era when it was
much less common than it is today to think about the federal devolution
of program and policy responsibilities to state governments, federal
policymakers—particularly political liberals—often worried about the
                                    “ S M A R T ( B E S T ) P R A C T I C E S ” R E S E A R C H    1 2 3




“Mississippi problem.” Mississippi was the rhetorical symbol of the poor,
backward, and probably racist jurisdiction that would almost surely wreck
or pervert any smart practice it was given responsibility for implementing.

BACK TO THE EIGHTFOLD PATH
Given the typical shortfall of good evidence relative to theory and specu-
lation when it comes to assessing a smart practice, there is a danger of
unwarranted optimism. Indeed, a common criticism of the best practices
research tradition is that it becomes excessively enthusiastic about what
appear to be good ideas before their worth is sufficiently tested.8
    But how much testing is “sufficient,” anyway? The answer has to be
framed partly in terms of the costs of displacing what might actually be a
better practice—perhaps even the practices currently in use (described
earlier as “letting present trends continue”). However, if you are reason-
ably confident that current practices are ineffective or harmful, the costs
of wrongly abandoning them in favor of the new and untried may not be
so high after all. Thus, although the new and untried should bear some
burden of proof, it should not be an excessive one. The correct approach
is to treat the risks and uncertainties involved in adopting some seem-
ingly smart practice as comparable to the uncertainties associated with
all the other alternatives under consideration.
    Of course, the costs of change—negotiation, insecurity, hard feelings,
and so on—must also be counted against bringing in a new and seem-
ingly smart practice. But such costs must be counted against any change,
not just change to accommodate smart practice. Moreover, if institutions
and people are very stuck in their ways, there may be benefits to change
as such, not merely costs.9




8. Unfortunately, excessive enthusiasm for experiments that eventually fail gives even
appropriate enthusiasm for experimentation a bad name.
9. Alternatively, if institutions and people are forever being reformed and reinvented
and remodeled—as occurs in many public school systems—there may be benefits to
stability, consistency, and focus.
                                                                  APPENDIX




SPECIMEN OF A REAL-WORLD
                                                                   A
POLICY ANALYSIS



The following text is excerpted from the policy brief “Mandatory Minimum
Drug Sentences: Throwing Away the Key or the Tax­payers’ Money?” pre-
pared by the RAND Corporation. It is provided as an example of a policy
document and was chosen for its thorough and focused analysis as well as its
concise presentation. My annotations appear in the numbered notes below the
text. The notes of the authors of the brief are indicated by asterisks.

PREFACE
In response to public concern over disparity of sentencing by judges and
brevity of terms served by criminals, state legislatures and the Congress
have written into law minimum sentences for specific crimes. In this
report, we estimate the cost-effectiveness of mandatory minimum sen-
tences for crimes related to cocaine distribution. These estimates are
made relative to the cost-effectiveness of spending additional resources
on enforcement without mandatory minimums and on drug treatment.1
Our central effectiveness measure is reduction of the nation’s cocaine

Source: Jonathan P. Caulkins, C. Peter Rydell, William L. Schwabe, and James Chiesa,
“Mandatory Minimum Drug Sentences: Throwing Away the Key or the Taxpayers’
Money?” (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, 1997).
1. Cost-effectiveness analysis requires comparison. Often we compare the cost-
effectiveness of some new state of the world with the old, existing one. But in this
case the researchers compare several alternative new states of the world.

                                                                                125
1 2 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




consumption, although we also examine reduction of cocaine-related
crimes, along with decrease in cocaine spending, which is related to
such crimes.2
   Because this report may be read by people with diverse interests, it is
divided into two parts.3 Readers interested principally in narcotics control
and criminal-justice policy may wish to stop at the end of Part I. Part II has
been prepared mainly for those also interested in the role and techniques
of mathematical modeling in policy analysis, although some effort has
been devoted to make it understandable to those not expert in this area.
   This research was supported by a gift from Richard B. Wolf of Richland
Mills and by funding from The Ford Foundation. This study was carried
out within RAND’s Drug Policy Research Center. The center’s work is
supported by The Ford Foundation, other foundations, government agen-
cies, corporations, and individuals. It carries out extensive assessments of
drug problems at local and national levels. Those interested in further
information should contact the center at RAND’s Santa Monica address.

SUMMARY
In recent decades, the American public has responded favorably to political
leaders and candidates who have espoused longer sentences for the posses-
sion and sale of drugs. Among the more popular sentencing extensions are
“mandatory minimums,” which require that a judge impose a sentence of
at least a specified length if certain criteria are met. For example, federal law
requires that a person convicted of possessing half a kilogram or more of
cocaine powder be sentenced to at least five years in prison.
    Mandatory minimums have enjoyed strong bipartisan support from
elected representatives and presidential candidates.4 To these proponents,
the certainty and severity of mandatory minimums make them better


2. These different “measures” are our “criteria.” Note that by making one “central” and
two others obviously less so, the authors implicitly are differentially weighting the
criteria.
3. They are “telling the story” to two different audiences—which amounts to telling
two different, though related, stories. Presumably the authors could have issued
separate reports, but the chosen format keeps complementary analyses together.
4. An important step in telling the story: establishing key features in the political
environment.
                                                                   A P P E N D I X A    1 2 7




able to achieve incarceration’s goals than are more flexible sentencing
policies.5 Those goals include punishing the convicted and keeping them
from committing more crimes for some period of time, as well as deter-
ring others not in prison from committing similar crimes. Critics, how-
ever, worry that mandatory minimums foreclose discretionary judgment
where it may most be needed, and they fear mandatory minimums result
in instances of unjust punishment.6
   These are all important considerations, but mandatory minimums asso-
ciated with drug crimes may also be viewed as a means of achieving the
nation’s drug control objectives. As such, how do they compare with other
means? Do they contribute to the central objective—decreasing the nation’s
drug consumption and related consequences7—at a cost that compares
favorably with other approaches? In this report, we estimate how successful
mandatory minimum sentences are, relative to other control strategies, at
reducing drug consumption, drug-related crime, and the total flow of rev-
enue through the cocaine market. The latter is a worthy objective in itself—
America would be better off if money spent on drugs were spent on almost
anything else—and it is also associated with drug-related crime.
   We focus on cocaine, which many view as the most problematic drug
in America today.8 We take two approaches to mathematically modeling9
the market for cocaine and arrive at the same basic conclusion: Mandatory
minimum sentences are not justifiable on the basis of cost-effectiveness at

5. The proponents are projecting outcomes. The authors of this report imply that
they do not necessarily accept these projections and that this analysis will do its own.
6. Proponents and critics clearly do not weight the evaluative criteria in the same
way. The authors imply that they hardly even notice one another’s criteria.
7. This description of the central objective of drug control policy establishes “drug
consumption” as the critical numerator in the cost-effectiveness analysis, though
others are to be considered as well.
8. Narrowing the focus keeps the analysis manageable. The authors must justify the
way they choose to narrow the focus, however. The shorthand version here is to call
it “the most problematic drug,” though without specifying what that means.
9. Not all models are mathematical. The phenomenon being analyzed here is com-
plex, and formal modeling is both possible and desirable. Deciding on the values for
particular parameters, such as the price elasticity of demand for cocaine, the cost to
dealers of being caught, and the effectiveness of treatment, to name just a few, is
somewhat speculative. The authors will use what evidence can be found in the
research literature, however.
1 2 8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




reducing cocaine consumption, cocaine expenditures, or drug-related crime.10
Mandatory minimums reduce cocaine consumption less per million tax-
payer dollars spent than does spending the same amount on enforcement
under the previous sentencing regime.11 And either type of incarceration
approach reduces drug consumption less than does putting heavy users
through treatment programs, per million dollars spent. Similar results are
obtained if the objective is to reduce spending on cocaine or cocaine-
related crime.12 A principal reason for these findings is the high cost of
incarceration. (Note these findings are limited to relative cost-effective-
ness. As mentioned above, mandatory minimums have been justified—
and criticized—on other grounds.)

Reducing Consumption: More Enforcement against Typical Dealers
First, we estimate the cost-effectiveness of additional expenditures on
enforcement against the average drug offender apprehended in the United
States (whether that apprehension is by federal, state, or local authorities).
In this approach, we track the flows of users among light-use, heavy-use,
and no-use categories, and we analyze how overall cocaine market
demand and supply respond to price. That is, if more money is spent on
enforcement and incarceration, costs to dealers are increased, and so is the
street price of cocaine; higher prices mean lower consumption.13 If more
money is spent on treatment, consumption is reduced for most clients
while they are in the program, and, for some, after they get out. We esti-
mate the changes in total cocaine consumption over time for an addi-
tional million dollars invested in the alternatives considered. These
changes, discounted to present value, are shown in Figure A-1.

10. The headline comes about as quickly as it possibly can. In italics, too.
11. This restatement of the study’s primary conclusion establishes “million taxpayers’
dollars spent” as the critical denominator in the cost-effectiveness equation.
12. No matter which criterion is chosen, it just so happens that treatment turns out
to be a better investment than tougher incarceration procedures.
13. Note the use of market theory to lay bare the heart of “the drug problem.” You do
not often see a newspaper account of this subject that refers to price movements,
demand, and supply. Yet the “laws” of supply and demand apply, in some sense, to
drug markets as much as they do to the market for green beans. It is almost impos-
sible to project the effects of alternative antidrug interventions without taking into
account how the market mediates whatever is done.
                                                                     A P P E N D I X A    1 2 9




  FIGURE A-1        Benefits of Alternative Cocaine Control Strategies



 Kilograms of consumption prevented
     per million 1992 dollars spent
            120

                      Program target
            100             Heavy users
                            Typical dealers
              80


              60


              40


              20


               0
                              Longer           Conventional          Treatment
                           sentences for       enforcement            of heavy
                            typical drug       across levels            users
                              dealers         of government




   The first two bars in the figure show the results of spending a mil-
lion 1992 dollars* on additional enforcement by agencies at various
levels of government against a representative sample of drug dealers.
As shown by the first bar, if that money were used to extend to federal
mandatory minimum lengths the sentences of dealers who would
have been arrested anyway, U.S. cocaine consumption would be
reduced by almost 13 kilograms. If, however, the money were used to

* All cost calculations in this report are in 1992 dollars. The choice of a reference year
for cost figures is arbitrary. We choose 1992 to facilitate comparison with the results
of earlier analyses. To convert costs in 1992 dollars to costs in 1996 dollars (the latest
year for which inflation data are available), multiply by 1.119. To convert kilograms
of cocaine consumption reduced per million 1992 dollars spent to kilograms
reduced per million 1996 dollars spent, divide by 1.119.
1 3 0    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




arrest, confiscate the assets of, prosecute, and incarcerate more dealers
(for prison terms of conventional length), cocaine consumption
would be reduced by over 27 kilograms.14 Spending the million dollars
treating heavy users would reduce cocaine consumption by a little over
100 kilograms.
   Note we are estimating the impact of an additional million dollars.
The results can be extrapolated to multiples thereof, but not to extremely
large changes in spending. They certainly do not suggest that the most
cost-effective approach is to shift all drug control resources from enforce-
ment to treatment. Note also that we refer in the figure to “longer sen-
tences” rather than to “mandatory minimums.”15 Data on drug dealers
arrested at state and local levels are insufficient to isolate those associated
with drug amounts sufficient to trigger mandatory minimums. Instead,
we analyze a hypothetical policy of applying the mandatory minimum
sanction—longer sentences—to all convicted dealers.16
   The values shown are dependent, of course, on various assumptions
we make. If the assumptions are changed, the values change. But for
changes in assumptions over reasonable ranges, do the values change
enough to make longer sentences more cost-effective than either of the
other alternatives? We find they do not.
   As an example, the values shown are dependent on the time horizon
in which one is interested. The reason for this is as follows. When faced
with extended sentences, drug dealers will want more income today to
compensate them for the risk of increased prison time. As a result,
cocaine prices will go up and consumption will go down. Benefits from

14. Note the importance of defining “the margin” where the policy operates. The
policy is twice as effective if you can restrict “the margin” to dealers who would not
have been arrested anyway.
15. The political rhetoric might oversimplify by talking about “tougher” approaches
to dealing, but the authors here distinguish two different forms of “tougher.” Even
more forms exist, of course.
16. All policies that deal with the future are “hypothetical.” Why do the authors go
out of their way to use this term explicitly here? Probably because they wish to dis-
tinguish the alternative they are analyzing from empirical specimens existing in the
real world. They are more interested in a “generic” strategy based on mandatory
minimum sanctions, a sort of composite of what does exist and what might exist in
a more ideal form.
                                                                 A P P E N D I X A    1 3 1




reduced consumption will thus accrue immediately, while the costs of
the extended prison terms will stretch out into the future. In contrast, if
more users are treated this year, the costs accrue immediately, while the
benefits in terms of reduced consumption by those who stay off cocaine
stretch out into the future. Figure A-1 takes account of these different
allocations of costs and benefits across future years in that future costs
and benefits are discounted annually, out to 15 years—a time horizon
typical in analyzing public policy. Beyond that point, any further costs
and benefits count as zero. What if that terminal point were moved
closer? What if one had not just a discounted interest in anything
beyond the immediate future, but no interest? If the time horizon is set
early enough, the effect is to “zero out” both the future stream of costs
from mandatory minimums and the future benefits from treatment.
Figure A-2 shows the relative cost-effectiveness of the three programs
analyzed when time horizons are set at various points, from 1 to 15
years. At 15 years, the lines match the heights of the bars in Figure A-1.
The time horizon must be reduced to only about three years before
mandatory minimums look preferable to additional conventional
enforcement, and close to two years before they look preferable to treat-
ment. Hence, mandatory minimums appear cost-effective only to the
highly myopic.17
   We also analyzed the implications of changing other assumptions.
For example, dealers would want to be compensated for the increased
risk of imprisonment they would incur in the event of increased
enforcement. But the typical person would demand less compensation
for being imprisoned five years from now than next year, and we
assume drug dealers are even more “present-oriented.” What would
happen, though, if dealers wanted more risk compensation, and if they
discounted future costs less heavily than we assume? Longer sentences
would seem more burdensome than we assume, dealers would demand
a higher premium for handling cocaine, the price of cocaine would rise
even more with increased enforcement spending, and consumption


17. A bit of wit and rhetoric! Who says you have to be dry and boring in telling your
story? The authors can get away with it here because their result is extremely
robust—and because they are well-known and respected analysts in this field.
1 3 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




   FIGURE A-2             Benefits of Alternative Cocaine Control Strategies for
                          Different Time Horizons

 Kilograms of consumption prevented
     per million 1992 dollars spent
               120

                                         Treatment
               100                       Conventional enforcement
                                         Longer sentences

                80


                60


                40


                20


                  0
                      1    2     3      4     5      6     7      8       9   10   11   12   13   14   15

                                                    Evaluation horizon (years)




would fall even more. Consumption would also fall more than we
expected if users were more responsive to price increases, i.e., if
demand were more “elastic.” We attempted to swing the balance
toward extended incarceration by simultaneously increasing risk com-
pensation by one-third, cutting the dealer discount rate by two-thirds,
and increasing the elasticity of demand by 50 percent.18 The general
profile of our results did indeed change. The cost-effectiveness of lon-
ger sentences tripled, while that of additional conventional enforce-
ment doubled, and that of treatment rose by about a quarter. However,
longer sentences remained the least cost-effective alternative, and
treatment the most.


18. This is another version of “sensitivity analysis.”
                                                             A P P E N D I X A    1 3 3




Reducing Consumption: More Enforcement
against Higher-Level Dealers
The first two bars in Figure A-1 represent enforcement approaches
applied to a representative sample of all drug dealers arrested. Perhaps
mandatory minimum sentences would be more cost-effective if they
were restricted to somewhat higher-level dealers. By “higher-level deal-
ers,” we mean those who operate at higher levels of the drug distribu-
tion system, who make more money and thus have more to lose from
more intensive enforcement. To approximate such a restriction, we
limit the set of offenders analyzed to those who are prosecuted at the
federal level and possess enough drugs to trigger a federal mandatory
minimum sentence.
   The results are shown in Figure A-3. There, the darkest bars represent
the reduction in cocaine consumption from spending an additional mil-
lion dollars in enforcement against the federal-level offenders just
defined. The light bars are those from Figure A-1. Reading from the left,
each light/dark pair of bars represents the same kind of program. The
distribution of long sentences is the same for the first two bars, and the
kinds of additional enforcement actions funded (arrest, seizure, prosecu-
tion, and incarceration for conventional sentence lengths) are the same
for the next two bars.
   As shown by the darker bars in Figure A-3, the consumption change
achieved per million dollars spent on mandatory minimums is closer
proportionately to that achieved through the other alternatives. While
longer sentences for a representative set of all dealers have 46 percent of
the effect of additional conventional enforcement against such dealers,
federal mandatory minimums have 57 percent of the effect of additional
conventional enforcement at the federal level.19 And, obviously, federal
mandatory minimums do better relative to treating heavy users than do
longer sentences for all dealers. To the higher-level dealers considered in
this analysis, time in prison carries a greater cost, and amounts of cocaine


19. These percentages are calculated from numbers to be read off Figure A-3. One
might wish the authors had somehow warned the reader that these numbers cannot
be read off what is actually drawn in A-3.
1 3 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




   FIGURE A-3            Benefits of Alternative Cocaine Control Strategies



    Kilograms of cocaine consumption
  reduced per million 1992 dollars spent
               120

                           Program target
               100               Heavy users
                                 Typical dealers
                                 Federal offenders
                 80


                 60


                 40


                 20


                  0
                          Longer            Federal         Conventional Conventional   Treatment
                       sentences for       mandatory        enforcement enforcement      of heavy
                        typical drug       minimum          across levels by federal       users
                          dealers          sentences       of government government




and other assets seized through increased enforcement are also larger.
Thus, risk compensation must be higher, and the higher resulting cocaine
prices drive down consumption more. Nonetheless, at any given level of
government, or against any given type of dealer, mandatory minimums
are less cost-effective than conventional enforcement.
   Why is that the case?20 Drug enforcement comprises two types of
components, each of which is costly for taxpayers and each of which
contributes to keeping drugs expensive: (1) arrest and conviction,
which impose costs on suppliers principally through the seizure of drugs
and other assets, and (2) incarceration of convicted defendants. Amid


20. Nice use of rhetorical question to vary the pace and tone.
                                                                 A P P E N D I X A    1 3 5




complaints about the “revolving door” of justice, some overlook that
arrest and conviction impose costs on dealers. In fact, on average, arrest
and conviction impose greater costs on dealers per taxpayer dollar spent
than does incarcerating dealers. Since mandatory minimums alter the
mix of these two components of enforcement in favor of incarceration,
they dilute or reduce the efficiency of enforcement relative to simply
expanding both components proportionately.
   As with the light bars, the precise heights of the dark bars in Figure
A-3 depend on various assumptions. Again, these include assumptions
about such uncertain values as the compensation dealers would demand
for increased imprisonment risk, the rate at which dealers discount
future costs, the responsiveness of buyers to shifts in cocaine prices,
what it costs to arrest a dealer, and the value of drugs and other assets
seized. To test the sensitivity of our results to these assumptions, we vary
the assumed values of factors such as these one at a time over substantial
ranges. In all cases, conventional enforcement is more cost-effective
than mandatory minimums, and treatment is more than twice as cost-
effective as mandatory minimums. Even when assumed values are var-
ied two at a time, large departures from assumed values are required for
mandatory minimums to be the most cost-effective approach. In
Figure A-4, for example, the government’s cost of arresting a dealer and
the compensation a dealer wants for risking a year of imprisonment are
varied simultaneously. The star shows the values assumed for the results
in Figure A-3. As Figure A-4 shows, mandatory minimums would be the
most cost-effective alternative only if arrest costs were to exceed $30,000
and a dealer were to value his time at some $250,000 or more per year.
Such dollar values would typify only those dealers at a fairly high level
in the cocaine trade and who are unusually difficult to arrest.** For
dealers costing less to arrest, cocaine control dollars would be better



** Even for these dealers, it is possible that conventional enforcement would be more
cost-effective than mandatory minimums. That would be the case if the range of
conventional sentences could be matched to the range of offenders so that the
highest-level dealers received very long sentences.
1 3 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




   FIGURE A-4            Which Program Is More Cost-Effective at Reducing
                         Cocaine Consumption Under Different Assumptions?


  Cost to dealers per year of imprisonment
               (1992 dollars)
              500,000


              400,000                                                        Mandatory
                                                                             minimums

                                      Conventional
              300,000                 enforcement


              200,000
                                                                              Treatment

              100,000


                     0
                                                20,000                    40,000            60,000

                                    Cost to government of making an arrest (1992 dollars)
  Note: Star indicates values assumed for dark bars (federal offenders) in Figure A-1.



spent on further conventional enforcement. For dealers demanding less
risk compensation, the money would be better spent treating heavy
users than on enforcement against such dealers.21
   Long sentences could thus be a smart strategy if selectively applied.
Unfortunately, because mandatory minimum sentences are triggered by

21. The uninitiated reader needs more help in interpreting Figure A-4 than the authors
provide. The figure is divided into three regions. Each region contains combinations of
values for the two parameters “cost to government” and “cost to dealers.” The boundar-
ies between the regions indicate where the parameter combinations imply different
winners in the cost-effectiveness competition that the authors have set up. Thus, man-
datory minimum sentences win only when the parameter combinations fall in approx-
imately the northeast quadrant, that is, when the costs are high both to dealers and the
government. In other RAND publications, this sort of mapping is called “threshold
analysis.” I call it, in Part I above, “break-even analysis.”
                                                          A P P E N D I X A    1 3 7




quantity possessed and because those thresholds are low, they are not
selectively applied to high-level dealers. (Indeed, anecdotal evidence sug-
gests that high-level dealers can sometimes avoid mandatory minimums
more easily than their subordinates. High-level dealers have more knowl-
edge about their organization to use as bargaining chips with prosecu-
tors. Furthermore, such dealers often do not physically possess their
drugs, as is required for a mandatory minimum to take effect; they hire
others to incur that risk. To the extent that this occurs, mandatory mini-
mum sentences would be even less effective than these results suggest.)

Reducing Cocaine-Related Crime
Of course, cocaine consumption is not the only measure of interest.
Many Americans are worried about the crime associated with cocaine
production, distribution, and use. Using data on the causes of drug-
related crime and our cocaine market analysis, we quantify the approxi-
mate crime reduction benefits of the various alternatives. We find no
difference between conventional enforcement and mandatory mini-
mums in relation to property crime; the former, however, should reduce
crimes against persons by about 70 percent more than the latter. But
treatment should reduce serious crimes (against persons as well as prop-
erty) the most per million dollars spent—on the order of 15 times as
much as the incarceration alternatives would.
   Why do we get these results?22 Most drug-related crime is economi-
cally motivated—for example, undertaken to procure money to support a
habit or to settle scores between rival dealers. Fewer crimes are the direct
result of drug consumption—crimes committed “under the influence.”
However, we find very little difference between conventional enforcement
and mandatory minimums in their effects on the money flowing through
the market, and thus very little difference in their effects on economically
motivated crime. We do find, as shown in Figure A-3, appreciable differ-
ences in consumption effects, and thus appreciable differences in effects
on crimes committed under the influence. The latter are more likely than
are economically motivated crimes to be crimes against persons.


22. Another well-placed rhetorical question.
1 3 8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




   Treatment, however, has an enormous advantage over enforcement in
reducing the economic value of the cocaine market—larger even than
that shown in Figure A-3 for reducing cocaine consumption. Why is
that?23 When a treated offender stays off drugs, that means less money
flowing into the market. But when a dealer facing the risk of a longer
sentence raises his price, say one percent, to compensate, buyers will
reduce the amount of cocaine they purchase. The best evidence suggests
that reduction will be something on the order of one percent.24 Thus, the
total revenue flowing through the cocaine market stays about the same,
and so do the incentives for economically motivated drug-related crimes.
Therefore, the effect of the enforcement alternatives is limited almost
entirely to the relatively small number of crimes committed under the
influence. Treatment, however, has an advantage against those crimes
similar to that shown in Figure A-3 and an even greater advantage against
the larger number of economically motivated crimes.

Conclusion
Long sentences for serious crimes have intuitive appeal. They respond
to deeply held beliefs about punishment for evil actions, and in many
cases they ensure that, by removing a criminal from the streets, further
crimes that would have been committed will not be. But in the case of
black-market crimes like drug dealing, a jailed supplier is often replaced
by another supplier if demand remains. And not all agree whether
mandatory minimums satisfy American standards of fairness and jus-
tice. Even those who believe they do must ask themselves to what extent
might it be desirable to give up some punishment of the guilty to gain
some further reduction in cocaine consumption—consumption that


23. And yet another!
24. So they base their model’s parameter estimates on some sort of evidence after all!
Because this report “Summary” is a summary of the logic of their analysis, the
authors do not trouble the reader with the details of how these projections were
made, that is, how their model is constructed and its parameters assigned numerical
values. These will appear in the full report. The word evidence here perhaps is
intended to reassure the reader that, although the analysis herein is “hypothetical,” as
the authors indicated above, the hypotheses are to the extent possible based on a
body of accumulated evidence.
                                                                 A P P E N D I X A    1 3 9




can victimize the innocent.25 This trade of punishment for drug use
reduction must be considered because long sentences are expensive and
cocaine control resources are limited. As we show, if reducing consump-
tion or violence is the goal, more can be achieved by spending additional
money arresting, prosecuting, and sentencing dealers to standard prison
terms than by spending it sentencing (fewer) dealers to longer, manda-
tory terms. (And that is to say nothing of what might be achieved by
redirecting resources from enforcement to treatment—admittedly, a
more difficult reallocation because those programs might be run by
completely different agencies.) We find an exception in the case of the
highest-level dealers—those who value their time most highly and are
hardest to apprehend—where sentences of mandatory minimum length
appear to be the most cost-effective approach. However, current manda-
tory minimum laws are not focused on those dealers.




25. The authors confront readers with a starkly defined trade-off.
                                                          APPENDIX




THINGS GOVERNMENTS DO
                                                            B
T   he following list of things governments do is meant to stimulate cre-
    ativity and give you ideas. The way to use it is to think about your
policy problem and then go down the list, asking yourself: “Might there
be any way to use this approach on this problem?”
   The “Why You Might Do It” discussion that accompanies each list of
“What You Might Do” is necessarily brief. It is intended principally to be
suggestive.

I. TAXES
A. What You Might Do
  1. Add a new tax
  2. Abolish an old tax
  3. Change the tax rate
  4. Change the tax base
  5. Improve collection machinery
  6. Tax an externality

B. Why You Might Do It
The most common conditions to which taxes are a solution are those in
which there is inadequate government revenue for some purpose and—
probably more important—those in which the structure of market prices
fails to capture the true economic opportunity costs. If market prices are
wrong, there are usually deeper structural reasons, such as oligopolistic



                                                                       141
1 4 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




power or government overregulation of some input, which might bear
correcting by other means as well.
  Naturally, too many taxes can also be a problem, if they are inhibiting
useful economic or social activity.

II. REGULATION
A. What You Might Do
    1. Add a new regulatory regime or abolish an old one
    2. Write new standards or remove old ones
    3. Tighten or loosen existing standards
    4. Ban or prohibit something entirely
    5. Improve the scientific and technical basis for writing standards
    6. Close or open loopholes
    7. Add, train, or better supervise enforcement personnel
    8. Improve targeting of enforcement to catch bad apples, or to
       increase deterrence, or to increase resource efficiency
    9. Raise or lower the level of effective sanctions
   10. Tighten or loosen appeals procedures
   11. Change reporting and auditing procedures
   12. Add, subtract, or improve complaint mechanisms for workers or
       the public

B. Why You Might Do It
Distinguish three quite different types of regulation. One aims at prices
and outputs in natural monopolies, for instance, the historical regulation
of local telephone service by a public utilities commission. As this exam-
ple suggests, technological change (e.g., cell phones, broadband) can
undermine natural-monopoly production and render this form of over-
sight irrelevant.
   A second type—sometimes called “social regulation”—is common in
regard to health and safety issues. It aims to correct imperfections arising
from poor market information or from excessive frictions resulting from
the use of civil law (usually tort or contract) remedies. Drug safety regu-
lation by the FDA is an example. Bank solvency regulation also fits this
category. Two sorts of problems are common in this type of regulation:
                                                           A P P E N D I X B    1 4 3




too little regulation and too much. Scientific uncertainties, technical dif-
ficulties of measurement, and political pressures typically lead to both of
these problems under varying conditions.
   A third type of regulation concerns entry, exit, output, price, and
service levels in supposedly oligopolistic industries (e.g., transportation).
Administering this type of regulation presents large problems of collect-
ing information and of coordinating the outputs of many firms. Politically,
there are often problems of anticompetitive “capture.” The deregulation
movement that has gathered political momentum since around 1978 has
led to a new appreciation of how much beneficial competition there
might be in these industries if government were simply to let go.
   Most air and water pollution regulation is thought of as social regula-
tion. However, administratively (and sometimes politically), it is more
like the third type of regulation, inasmuch as the principal laws now on
the books involve government agencies in coordinating the outputs of a
variety of firms.

III. SUBSIDIES AND GRANTS
A. What You Might Do
  1. Add a new one
  2. Abolish an old one
  3. Change the level
  4. Change the marginal rate
  5. Introduce, abolish, or change a formula by which subsidies are
     allocated
  6. Modify the conditions of receipt or eligibility
  7. Loosen enforcement
  8. Tighten enforcement

B. Why You Might Do It
Incentive effects.   Subsidies and grants are often used to stimulate activ-
ities that neither markets nor nonprofit or voluntary action appears to
produce in adequate quantity or quality. They also play important roles in
the system of intergovernmental relationships—when one level of gov-
ernment wishes to encourage another level of government to do certain
1 4 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




things—and in the system of relationships between governments and
nonprofit organizations.
Wealth effects.   Grants and subsidies also transfer resources to people
or organizations or levels of government in order to make the recipients
wealthier.
Some design problems.   It often happens that you want to create incen-
tive effects but not wealth effects, or vice versa. For instance, you may
wish to make poor people wealthier via grants and subsidies but without
diminishing work incentives. Or you may wish to encourage businesses
or universities to undertake more research and development of a certain
kind but without unduly enriching them or allowing them to use the
subsidies inefficiently.
   Note that subsidies and grants are typically administered with various
guidelines or conditions attached. The threat to remove a long-time
grant or subsidy for violation of the guidelines or conditions can act as a
type of regulatory sanction, thus making certain grants and subsidies
into a peculiar regulatory hybrid.

IV. SERVICE PROVISION
A. What You Might Do
    1. Add a new service
    2. Expand an existing service
    3. Organize outreach to potential beneficiaries not now using the service
    4. Better customize an existing service to a particular subpopulation
    5. Provide vouchers for a particular service so that people may choose
       from an array of competitive service providers
    6. Link two or more existing service delivery systems to take advantage
       of potential synergies or to make life easier for service recipients
    7. Reduce service users’ difficulties in accessing the service by
       a. going online
       b. computerizing intake and eligibility processes
       c. simplifying forms
       d. colocating services
       e. permitting appointments by phone
                                                             A P P E N D I X B    1 4 5




      f. facilitating personal inquiries and complaints
      g. improving payment options

B. Why You Might Do It
Services come in two basic flavors. Desired services are those that people
want, such as parks and good schools. Paternalistic services are those that
people may or may not want but that outsiders want them to have because
there is some potential payoff to the outsiders (e.g., rehabilitative services
for the mentally ill, organized shelters for the homeless, job search ser-
vices for individuals on welfare). It is a lot easier to design a service provi-
sion system for desired services than to do so for paternalistic services.

V. AGENCY BUDGETS
A. What You Might Do
   1. Add a lot to the budget
   2. Add just a little to the budget
   3. Hold the budget at last year’s level
   4. Cut the budget a little
   5. Cut the budget a lot—to the point of beginning to terminate the
      agency
   6. Shift allocations from one budget item to another

B. Why You Might Do It
You may want to adjust an agency’s budget according to whether you like
what it does. In addition, how you manipulate an agency’s budget sends
political signals about the degree of satisfaction or dissatisfaction with
the agency’s performance and so may be thought to have incentive effects
as well as wealth effects. It is not easy to use the budget as a means of
creating incentive effects, however.

VI. INFORMATION
A. What You Might Do
   1. Require disclosure
   2. Direct government rating or certification
1 4 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




    3. Standardize display or format
    4. Simplify information
    5. Subsidize production of information
    6. Subsidize dissemination of information

B. Why You Might Do It
Information production, dissemination, and validation may be subopti-
mal due to the declining average (and sometimes marginal) cost nature
of the activity. Information consumption may be suboptimal due to the
hidden costs of consumption (such as time spent reading or hearing or
interpreting or sifting or verifying).

VII. THE STRUCTURE OF PRIVATE RIGHTS
A. What You Might Modify or Create
    1. Contract rights and duties
    2. Property rights
    3. Liability duties
    4. Family law
    5. Constitutional rights
    6. Labor law
    7. Corporate law
    8. Criminal law
    9. Dispute-resolving institutions other than litigation and courts

B. Why You Might Do It
In recent years, two of the biggest issues drawing the attention of policy
analysts and economists interested in legal institutions are the economi-
cally efficient incidence of risk—it should fall on the party that can man-
age it at the lowest social cost—and the costs involved in administering
any adjudicative system. Since private-law duties and rights do a lot to
allocate risk (e.g., if your product exposes the user to risk and ultimately
injury, you may be liable for damages, unless perhaps the user abused or
misused it or agreed to assume the risks of use), adjusting laws is some-
times a powerful policy intervention mechanism. Also, much creative
                                                         A P P E N D I X B    1 4 7




thinking has gone into finding ways to reduce the administrative and
adjudicative costs.
   In addition to these economic matters, there is also concern about
compensation for harm. Laws can be changed so as to shift wealth—in
some prospective, actuarial sense or in a real, present-time sense—
among different interests or classes of people.
   The wealth-shifting and risk-shifting effects of legal changes may both
work in the desired direction, or they may work at cross-purposes. In addi-
tion, both may work together with, or at cross-purposes with, the desire to
reduce administrative and adjudicative costs.

VIII. THE FRAMEWORK OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
A. What You Might Do
  1. Encourage competition
  2. Encourage concentration
  3. Control prices and wages (and profits)
  4. Decontrol prices and wages (and profits)
  5. Control output levels
  6. Decontrol output levels
  7. Change tax incentives up or down
  8. Provide public jobs
  9. Abolish public jobs

B. Why You Might Do It
Supporting more government intervention.   On the supply side, there
may be monopoly or oligopoly problems. On the demand side, consum-
ers may be relatively nonmobile or otherwise vulnerable to exploitation—
and the same may be true of workers.

Supporting less government intervention.   You may decide that politi-
cal forces have captured the government administrative apparatus and
perverted the intent, or that the information costs to government
entailed in doing the job well are simply too high, or that technology has
changed and made an older form of government intervention less appro-
priate or effective or efficient.
1 4 8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




IX. EDUCATION AND CONSULTATION
A. What You Might Do
    1. Warn of hazards or dangers
    2. Raise consciousness through exhortation or inspiration
    3. Provide technical assistance
    4. Upgrade skills and competencies
    5. Change values
    6. Professionalize the providers of a service through training or certi-
       fication or licensing

B. Why You Might Do It
People may be unaware of a problem or an opportunity. They may be
careless or unfeeling. There may be too many untrained or unskilled
people in jobs demanding too much responsibility.

X. FINANCING AND CONTRACTING
A. What You Might Do
    1. Create a new (governmental) market
    2. Abolish an existing (governmental) market
    3. Alter reimbursement rates
    4. Change the basis for reimbursement (e.g., cost-plus, price per
       unit, sliding scale dependent on quantity, performance bonuses
       or penalties)
    5. Lease governmentally held resources
    6. Alter user fee structure
    7. Redesign bidding systems
    8. Change contract enforcement methods
    9. Furnish loans
   10. Guarantee loans
   11. Subsidize loans
   12. Set up a public enterprise
   13. Dismantle a public enterprise
   14. “Privatize” a hitherto public enterprise
   15. Modify insurance arrangements
   16. Change procurement practices
                                                        A P P E N D I X B    1 4 9




B. Why You Might Do It
Capital and/or insurance markets may be working inefficiently. The gov-
ernmental contracting and procurement machinery may not be operating
well—it may be too rigid, or too corrupt, or too expensive, or too slow.

XI. BUREAUCRATIC AND POLITICAL REFORMS
A. What You Might Do
The number of possibilities is too great to list. It ranges across such
activities as reorganizations, replacing top supervisory personnel,
improving information systems, and raising wages and salaries.

B. Why You Might Do It
The substantive reasons are too numerous to list. We should note, though,
that in many policy contexts there are important political and symbolic
considerations for undertaking bureaucratic and political reforms. The
political considerations often involve enhancing the power of one social
interest or point of view at the expense of another. The symbolic consid-
erations often involve ducking the really hard or impossible problems at
the social level in favor of doing something readily seen in a domain over
which government appears to have control (that is, its own operations).
                                                             APPENDIX




UNDERSTANDING PUBLIC AND
                                                             C
NONPROFIT INSTITUTIONS: ASKING
THE RIGHT QUESTIONS




P   olicy analysis, properly done, requires you to think not only about the
    technical aspects of governmental action but also about its institu-
tional aspects—that is, the institutions that implement policy. Whether
implementation goes well or poorly depends in part on whether the rele-
vant institutions want to facilitate or impede the policy at hand. But moti-
vation is not the whole story; capacity is at least as important. Here I want
to draw attention primarily to the aspects of organizational structure and
process that bear on capacity, and I do so not by offering a detailed exposi-
tion but by posing some (41) questions that the analyst ought to be asking.

MISSION
 1: What is the mission of the agency?
    • As expressed in authoritative sources?
    • As understood and enacted by agency managers and employees?

ENVIRONMENT
 2: What support/opposition does the agency have for its mission, and
    for itself, in its “authorizing environment”—that is, the totality of
    actors whose legal and nonlegal attitudes and actions determine
    agency legitimacy in the polity?
    • Evidence from budgetary allocations?
    • Other evidence?
                                                                          151
1 5 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




 3: Is the task environment relatively placid, changing predictably, or
    changing unpredictably? Examples of what is meant by these terms:
      • Placid: telephone company in 1975
      • Changing predictably: hospitals in the 1970s, before managed care
        but in the era when changing technologies were introduced and
        when overcapacity was looming
      • Changing unpredictably: telecommunications companies today;
        hospitals today, facing changes in the insurance marketplace, in
        technology, and in government policies

   Note that the less predictability and the faster the pace of change, the
greater the need for getting information from the organization’s field
people rapidly; allowing them to make at least some decisions on their
own; and making grand strategic shifts from the center.
 4: Who are the agency’s main competitors for resources and/or domain
    of legitimate action?
 5: Does the agency have a comparative advantage—or disadvantage—
    in meeting the competition?
 6: Does the agency face rivals who don’t merely compete but are down-
    right hostile to aspects of the agency’s mission or philosophy?

PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT
 7: What metrics are available to tell us how effectively and efficiently
    the agency is performing?

      • Producing outputs and outcomes?
   Outputs are what you can operationally count as a result of the agency’s
productive work, such as number of students graduated, number of acres
of forest thinned, number of passengers carried per day. Outcomes are
consequences of the outputs that we actually value per se, such as greater
employability of those students, greater fire resistance of those forests,
reduction in transportation time or in pollution levels or increases in
transportation satisfaction.
   It is usually (much) harder to measure outcomes than outputs.
                                                          A P P E N D I X C    1 5 3




   Outcomes are the product of more than the agency’s outputs. Hence
crediting or blaming the agency for the quality of the outcomes is not
straightforward.
 8: Compared to what benchmarks or standards?
    • Other similar organizations?
    • The same agency in previous years?
    • An absolute standard?
 9: What additional metrics would you, ideally, like to see?
10: Who are the agency’s “customers,” if any? Are they being well served?
    What is their opinion?
    • It is easy to see a park user as a “customer” of the parks department.
    • But is a taxpayer a customer of the IRS?
    • Is the student a customer of the school? Or is her family?

TECHNOLOGY
Technology is a slightly fuzzy word, more easily defined by example than
by abstractions.

11: To what extent does the agency use a service-delivery technology? A
    regulatory technology? A people-changing technology? A project
    technology?
    • Service-delivery technology: a transportation agency’s provision of
      vehicles and other facilities for use by patrons; writing and mail-
      ing Social Security checks; issuance of annual auto registration
      plates or stickers
    • Regulatory technology: command-and-control activities, such as
      environmental inspection and enforcement; OSHA regulations;
      restaurant sanitation inspections
    • People-changing technology: education; probation; child protective
      services
    • Project technology: issuance of a land-use plan; construction of a
      convention center; immunization of all youngsters against this
      year’s strain of flu
1 5 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




12: Is it a strong or a weak technology?
      • A strong technology—such as writing Social Security checks—is
        replicable and works in all contexts.
      • A weak technology—such as counseling probationers—is not eas-
        ily replicated and is sensitive to social context and individual-
        level competency.

   The structure and process you use to run an agency will depend to
some degree on the type of technology you are implementing, partly for
technical reasons and partly for political reasons: you get into trouble if
you adopt a regulatory attitude when you should be serving a “customer,”
and vice versa.

13: Is the agency’s authority structure appropriate to the agency’s mis-
    sion, technology, and human resources?
14: Is the agency’s internal division of labor appropriate to the agency’s
    mission, technology, and human resources?
15: Does the agency have effective means—formal and/or informal—to
    create working relationships across unit boundaries?

PRODUCTION/DELIVERY PROCESSES
16: What is (are) the principal process(es) the organization uses to imple-
    ment its production technology(ies)—that is, to produce its outputs?

  This question is complicated because it focuses on processes that con-
nect the organization’s activities, the human and physical materials it
works on, and the way in which it transforms materials.

    • In environmental and other kinds of command-and-control regu-
      lation, we have processes of “standard setting, inspections for com-
      pliance with standards, and the threat and actuality of punishment
      for noncompliance,” a complicated form of deterrence.
    • In a welfare program, the process involves determinations of eligi-
      bility and amount.
                                                           A P P E N D I X C    1 5 5




FRONT-LINE WORKERS AND CO-PRODUCERS
17: Are the front-line workers doing a good job? Are they competent?
    Motivated? Adequately supported by the organization?
18: What systems of incentives, supervision, and support are in place to
    motivate them, help them, and hold them accountable? Are the
    means of recruiting them suited to getting individuals with the right
    qualifications?
19: Does the organization make full use of the talents and information
    residing at the front-line level?
20: To what extent does the agency also rely on “co-producers”—people
    and organizations that share in the production process without
    being employed by the agency?
     • Welfare recipients are co-producers, along with the welfare agen-
       cy, to the extent that they assist, and are assisted by, the agency in
       the recipients’ efforts to find jobs.
     • Parents co-produce their children’s education along with the chil-
       dren’s teachers.
     • Along with the environmental regulatory agency, complying firms
       co-produce environmental improvement.
21: Does the agency manage its co-producers well? Do they provide the
    proper tools? Information? Motivation?

PARTNERS AND OTHER OUTSIDERS
22: To what extent does the agency rely on public and not-for-profit
    partners to accomplish its mission? Does the agency manage these
    relationships effectively?1
23: Does it rely heavily on for-profit vendors? Does it manage these rela-
    tionships effectively?
24: Does it effectively manage its relationships with governmental “over-
    head” (or “control” or “staff ”) agencies—such as the Departments of
    Finance or Budget, Personnel, Procurement, Audit, and so on?

1. For an extensive discussion, see Bardach (1998).
1 5 6    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




CENTRALIZATION/DECENTRALIZATION
25: If the organization delivers services at multiple sites (as in a school
    district), does it have an effective balance of centralization and
    decentralization?
26: Does it use its internal budget-making procedures to structure incen-
    tives for performance improvements and cost reductions?

CULTURE AND COMMUNICATIONS
27: Does the agency have a relatively “strong” or “weak” culture?
      • Strong culture: the U.S. Navy; the local fire department; the Forest
        Service; the California Legislative Analyst’s Office
      • Weak culture: many contemporary public health departments;
        many inner-city public schools
28: Is the culture relatively hierarchical or egalitarian? Rules-oriented or
    performance-oriented, or both? Where do efficiency and cost mini-
    mization fit in its culture?
29: Are communications within the agency relatively unconstrained by
    hierarchy and/or by subunit boundaries? Are people relatively unafraid
    to speak their minds, or are they circumspect and cautious? Is entre-
    preneurship encouraged or discouraged?
30: Do senior managers attempt to “lead through culture”? How?
31: Are creativity and innovation valued within the agency? Does the
    agency make systematic efforts to stimulate creativity and innovation?

POLITICS
32: Are there factions within the organization? If so, are they based on
    professional, ideological, or bureaucratic cleavages? On other factors?
33: Does factional competition or conflict degrade organizational per-
    formance or—by stimulating effort and healthy competition—
    improve it?
34: How do senior managers deal with the existence of factions?

LEADERSHIP
35: Who, if anyone, is a leader in this organization?
36: How does such a person gain and preserve legitimacy?
                                                        A P P E N D I X C    1 5 7




37: How effective is (are) the leader(s)?
38: What functions do they play in the organization?
39: What strategies do they use to carry out their leadership functions?

CHANGE
40: Is there a culture of continuous improvement—a term originally asso-
    ciated with the Total Quality Management (TQM) movement—and
    learning from mistakes?
41: Does the agency have the capacity and motivation to scan the envi-
    ronment for signs of opportunity or danger? If such signs are pres-
    ent, can the agency adapt effectively?
                                                             APPENDIX




STRATEGIC ADVICE ON THE DYNAMICS
                                                             D
OF GATHERING POLITICAL SUPPORT



T    his Practical Guide is largely about the intellectual aspects of policy
     analysis done in the public interest. Its lofty focus should not obscure
the fact that the adoption of policy occurs through a process that is often
untainted by much intellectuality at all and is subject to the pushing and
hauling of many sorts of stakeholders, not all of them concerned with
“the public interest.”
    All policy is political, whether the politics takes place in a back room
or within a legislature, an organization, or a community. You must build
support and neutralize opponents. To do this, at the interpersonal level,
you must make arguments, frame and reframe “the facts,” call in favors,
imply threats. At the organizational and institutional levels, you must
mobilize allies, manipulate arenas and calendars, offer (and extract) con-
cessions, and negotiate side-payments.
    All these issues of attitude and influence involve a good deal of calcula-
tion and estimation: which agency’s budget will grow larger; whose turf
will be diminished? How much weight, or influence, do these supporting
and opposing interests carry with the key decision makers anyway? I ignore
all such questions here, although in your work you must both ask them
and develop the information to answer them. The elementary answers are
fairly obvious, however, and the sophisticated answers would take up too
much space. (Example question: will agencies support policies that expand
their budgets and powers? Elementary answer: yes. Sophisticated answer:
usually yes, but probably not if such expansion risks changing internal
power relations drastically or exposing the agency to possible failure and
                                                                           159
1 6 0    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




criticism, etc. Even more sophisticated answer: . . . [this I leave to your
imagination and experience].)
   One might say that these matters of attitude and influence are instanc-
es of static analysis. Journalists’ and political scientists’ accounts of the
legislative process are rich in such instances. I limit my discussion here,
though, to dynamic analysis of the process, which involves questions of
sequence (what you should do before, or after, you do some other thing)
and timing (what to do “early” or “late” in the projected course of a
months- or possibly years-long campaign).1
   The assumption here is that one can make a list of generic “things to
do” based on general knowledge of how such campaigns play themselves
out, then postulate a generic flow of threats and opportunities over the
course of such a campaign, and, finally, map the list of “things to do” into
this flow with the object of maximizing the chances of winning. More
precisely, you want to do the mapping not only with winning in mind but
also with the idea of conserving political and other resources so that they
will be available for other campaigns.
   As a basic example, let us consider the case of a political entrepreneur
trying to get a bill passed by a legislative body. The general outline of the
process and of entrepreneurial strategy should apply to roughly analo-
gous situations as well, such as trying to win approval from senior man-
agement to try some organizational innovation.
   Start with the idea that you need to accumulate Support2 from a vari-
ety of Interests (construed very broadly, and including individuals as well
as groups or organizations) up to the point that you have Enough Support
to swing the balance toward legislative victory for some Proposal. For the
sake of concreteness, think about passing a bill to remove an existing
statute requiring mandatory minimum sentences for drug users and


1. For a more elaborate discussion of dynamic analysis in general, see Bardach
(2006); and also a very early effort, Bardach (1972). For an effort to describe the
dynamics of building an interagency collaborative, see Bardach (2008).
2. From here on, I capitalize terms—and italicize them on first occurrence—that
could be integrated into a formal model and, in that context, would deserve precise
definition. There are relatively few such terms, and they would make an economical
but, I believe, powerful model. For our purposes here, however, the context and the
everyday meanings of the terms make the concepts clear enough.
                                                                  A P P E N D I X D    1 6 1




low-level dealers, while retaining them for high-level dealers, as would be
implied by the RAND analysis in Appendix A.
   Assume that there is a hazily perceived and somewhat movable End-
date, months or years off and linked to Allies’3 willingness to plug along
before concluding that the cause is lost and that other drug policy issues
now deserve their attention and other Resources. The basic rule is this: if
your Proposal accumulates Enough Support at the moment of the End-
date, you win; otherwise you lose. What sequencing and timing strategies
and tactics should you deploy?

Sequencing
First consider the problem of sequencing, in particular whether getting
some Interests on board first will make it politically easier to approach
others subsequently. Who might these primary Interests be?

   • Persons with drug-policy expertise who agree with the RAND analy-
     sis, as well as persons or groups with a reputation for soundness, judg-
     ment, and ideological compatibility, might clear the way for Interests
     concerned about the practicality and efficacy of your Proposal.
   • For Interests with an internal hierarchy, such as a state substance
     abuse agency or a political party organization, getting Support from
     experts or influentials lower down might require getting clearance
     from individuals higher up in the hierarchy.
   • Access to particularly Weighty individuals, such as the chair of the
     Assembly Committee on Criminal Justice, might require working
     through a chain of introductions and connections.

Timing
One aspect of timing involves trying to stimulate bandwagon effects: get
some Weighty Interests on board early in order to create the impression that
success is inevitable, which will (1) draw in Interests concerned primarily
with being on the winning side and, (2) Neutralize, at least for the time
being, Interests who might otherwise go into active opposition.

3. Allies are Supporters who are also active in trying to woo potential new Supporters
and in attempting to Neutralize actual or potential Opponents.
1 6 2    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




    Other aspects of timing are more subtle. Suppose that you have a
rough but generally reliable time-profile (or map) of Opportunities and
threats that tend to emerge relatively early or relatively late in the course
of a campaign. You are thus able to time your actions so as to capitalize
on the Opportunities and Neutralize the threats. You are also able to
(roughly) plan to expend certain Resources early in order to capitalize
on the Opportunities that come early on and then vanish forever, and
to conserve certain (Depletable) Resources for the threats that you can
anticipate toward the middle and end of the process.4 And, if you are
lucky, you may never have to expend those Resources at all.
    For instance, early in the campaign you want to win over those
Interests who will be enthusiastic Supporters and active recruiters—that
is, real Allies. They will help you with raising money and gaining access
to other such tangible Resources as office space, talented staffers, strategic
advisers, and communications experts.
    Unfortunately for you, repealing mandatory minimum sentences is
not a policy Proposal that engages a natural constituency of Resource-
rich potential Allies. You might find a few drug-policy and criminal-
justice policy experts, some grassroots ethnic advocacy groups (who
observe that their ethnic confreres are disproportionately locked up under
the current laws), possibly the state university system (which sees scarce
budget dollars diverted from higher education to build more prisons for
ever-growing populations of prisoners), and perhaps the odd taxpayer
group concerned with the budget and the tax burden more generally.
But, whatever the limitations of their endowments, these are the sorts of
Allies with Marketing Resources that you will need to go into business. In
fact, you need them so much in the early days of the campaign that you
will need to expend cash, call in political Debts, and ask for political
Favors (that is, go into Debt yourself).
    These early days represent a significant Opportunity for utilization of
your scarce Resources for one very important reason: the Opposition will
not yet have mobilized. (The Opposition is likely to include, among


4. As a logical matter, you would also be able to plan to Neutralize any threats that
emerged early and seize Opportunities that emerged late. But as an empirical matter,
I do not think these possibilities important enough to discuss here.
                                                                     A P P E N D I X D    1 6 3




others, politicians who find demagogy on “law and order” a useful elec-
toral tool; contractors and subcontractors who profit from the prison-
building boom; rural communities for whom prisons are a valuable
source of employment; the prison guards union.) You and your Allies will
be able to hold the stage yourselves, make your pitch—that is, Tell Your
Story—and hype the bandwagon aspects of your coalition’s progress.
   Why is the Opposition silent? It takes time for its members to organize
themselves, and some may be temporarily occupied with more pressing
matters anyway. Most important, they know that most such attempts at
significant policy change simply die of their own accord, and so they may
not need to go out of their way to kill this one. Indifference, skepticism,
the comfort of the known, and the veto-enabling character of our politi-
cal institutions (e.g., checks and balances) pose a high barrier to change.
Although these Opposition skeptics are right, they nevertheless are giv-
ing you a brief moment in the sun, which you would be wise to seize,
even if it means taking certain risks.
   As the Support for your Proposal visibly rises, however, the Opposition
manages to organize a countermobilization. It succeeds in stalling your
efforts to persuade Interests that are still uncommitted and even man-
ages to Neutralize a few of the Interests you thought you had won to
your cause.
   Now is the time to expend some of the Depletable Resources5 you have
been conserving and perhaps to borrow a little against the future as well.
What are these Resources?

   • First, Debts—owed to you (and your coalition Allies) in exchange
     for past Favors you have done the indebted parties—that you can
     now call in.
   • Second, policy Concessions you can make—that is, amendments to
     your Proposal. In this case, you might offer to enlarge the definition
     of “high-level dealer” beyond what you had originally proposed.

5. A Depletable Resource is one that, when used, is used up. Examples are money and
Debts that are called in. Requests for Favors establish future liabilities; and the capac-
ity for honoring them is in some sense Depletable, the exceptional case being that of
reinvestment of Favors in such a way that overall capacity is augmented, much as
business loans can lead to larger profits and even more successful enterprise.
1 6 4    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




    • Third, normative expectations about the contributions of Allies
      that you can implicitly enforce—for instance, “as we are all in this
      together, it would be helpful if one of your people could make a call
      on Representative X.”
    • Finally, Debts that you can create (up to some limit, of course,
      which is why this is a Depletable Resource) by asking Favors.

   But note well: although expending all such Resources is costly,
Concessions may be doubly costly, because a Concession on policy usu-
ally represents either a goal or an objective foregone and also, possibly,
a seeming breach of loyalty with Allies who have already signed on in
the hopes of passing the very element of the Proposal that you are giv-
ing up. (Perhaps the ethnic advocacy Interests who signed on early will
be severely alienated by your enlargement of the pool of “high-level
dealers.”) Hence, in this recovery phase, you stand a very good chance
of raising fears among all your Allies that their hearts’ desires are also
in jeopardy.
   Given that you can anticipate these coalition-fragmenting develop-
ments, you can take one or more prophylactic measures: build in potential
Concessions (bargaining chips) of relatively low value to you and your
Allies early in the contest—such as starting with an extremely restricted
definition of “high-level dealers”—so that they may be ceded during the
recovery phase; accumulate a surplus of Allies and Supporters as a buffer
against defections by the angry and disappointed during the recovery
phase; develop a reputation for integrity that can withstand suspicions of
carelessness and disloyalty.
   At some point, the Proposal is embodied in a bill, and the contest over
the bill gets structured by the procedures of the legislature—its commit-
tees, its rules, and its calendars. The Attentive Public expands as well.
Earlier, it had included mostly Interests concerned about the policies
and Resources pertaining to drugs and criminal justice. Now it includes
legislators (and staff) who are concerned about the Proposal’s possible
uses in partisan, institutional, and interpersonal competition. The rele-
vance of Marketing Resources declines relative to that of more political
Resources, which can be brought to bear on the manipulation of legisla-
tive procedures and the augmentation of Support or the Neutralizing of
                                                        A P P E N D I X D    1 6 5




Opposition by the use of Side-payments. Neutralization is especially use-
ful—for instance, promising to support the prison guards’ union in its
next bid for a wage increase.
   Also, as the contest approaches its increasingly less obscure End-date,
and the margin of possible victory or defeat becomes thinner and clearer
(in contests destined to be close), both Allies and Opponents engage in
riskier maneuvers in regard to an increasingly heterogeneous and volatile
Attentive Public, with somewhat unpredictable effects. In this End-game
phase of high risk and uncertainty, you want to have a goodly store of
highly Fungible Resources, such as callable Debts and Good Will, which
also happen to be Depletable. Hence, it is prudent to conserve these more
political and Fungible Resources until this time, even though they might
have been of some use in earlier phases as well. To put it epigrammati-
cally, if the Speaker of the Assembly owes you a Favor, it’s the ace of
trumps, and don’t play it until you absolutely need to.
                       REFERENCES




Allison, Graham. 1971. Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis.
   Boston: Little, Brown.
Bardach, Eugene. 1972. The Skill Factor in Politics: Repealing the Mental
   Commitment Laws in California. Berkeley: University of California Press.
———. 1977. The Implementation Game: What Happens after a Bill Becomes a
   Law. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
———. 1997. Implementing a Paternalist Welfare-to-Work Program. In The New
   Paternalism: Supervisory Approaches to Poverty, ed. Lawrence Mead, 248–278.
   Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
———. 1998. Getting Agencies to Work Together: The Practice and Theory of
   Managerial Craftsmanship. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
———. 2004. The Extrapolation Problem: How Can We Learn from the
   Experience of Others? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 23 (Spring):
   205–220.
———. 2006. Policy Dynamics. In The Oxford Handbook of Public Policy, ed.
   M. Moran, M. Rein, and R.E. Goodin, 336–366. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford
   University Press.
———. 2008. Developmental Processes: A Conceptual Exploration. In Innovations
   in Government: Research, Recognition, and Replication, ed. S. Borins, 113–137.
   Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
Barzelay, Michael. 1992. Breaking through Bureaucracy: A New Vision for
   Managing in Government. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Behn, Robert D., and James W. Vaupel. 1982. Quick Analysis for Busy Decision-
   Makers. New York: Basic Books.
Bitner, M. J., A. L. Ostrom, and F. Morgan. 2008. Service Blueprinting: A Practical
   Technique for Service Innovation. California Management Review 50 (3).



                                                                               167
1 6 8    A P R A C T I C A L G U I D E F O R P O L I C Y A N A LY S I S




Borins, Sandford. 1998. Innovating with Integrity: How Local Heroes Are Transforming
   American Government. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Cryan, Phillp, Nina Horne, Jessica Shipley, and Benjamin Thornley. 2008. Building
   a Path to a Greener Future: City Climate Change Policies for 2050. Goldman
   School of Public Policy, University of California, Berkeley.
Dery, David. 1984. Problem Definition in Policy Analysis. Lawrence: University
   Press of Kansas.
Farkas, George. 1998. Reading One-to-One: An Intensive Program Serving a
   Great Many Students While Still Achieving Large Effects. In Social Programs
   That Work, ed. Jonathan Crane, 75–109. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Friedman, Lee S. 2002. Microeconomic Policy Analysis. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
   University Press.
Glazer, Amihai, and Lawrence S. Rothenberg. 2001. Why Government Succeeds
   and Why It Fails. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Greenwood, Peter H., Karyn E. Model, C. Peter Rydell, and James Chiesa. 1995.
   Diverting Children from a Life of Crime: Measuring Costs and Benefits. Santa
   Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation.
Gupta, D. K. 2001. Analyzing Public Policy: Concepts, Tools, and Techniques.
   Washington, D.C.: CQ Press.
Klitgaard, Robert. forthcoming. Policy Analysis and Evaluation 2.0.
Lave, Charles A., and James G. March. 1975. An Introduction to Models in the
   Social Sciences. New York: Harper and Row.
Lempert, Robert J., Steven W. Popper, and Steven C. Bankes. 2003. Shaping the
   Next One Hundred Years: New Methods for Quantitative, Long-Term Policy
   Analysis. Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Pardee Center.
MacRae, Duncan, Jr., and Dale Whittington. 1997. Expert Advice for Policy Choice:
   Analysis and Discourse. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Moore, Mark H. 1996. Creating Public Value: Strategic Management in Government.
   Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Morgan, M. Granger, and Max Henrion. 1990. Uncertainty: A Guide to Dealing
   with Uncertainty in Quantitative Risk and Policy Analysis. Cambridge, U.K.:
   Cambridge University Press.
Osborne, David, and Ted Gaebler. 1992. Reinventing Government: How the
   Entrepreneurial Spirit Is Transforming the Public Sector. Reading, Mass.: Addison-
   Wesley.
RAND Corporation. 1994. Guidelines for Preparing RAND Briefings. RAND
   publication no. CP(I)-269. Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation.
Rosenthal, Stephen R. 1982. Managing Government Operations. Boston: Little,
   Brown.
Salamon, Lester, ed. 2002. The Tools of Government: A Guide to the New
   Governance. New York: Oxford University Press.
                                                                R E F E R E N C E S    1 6 9




Scott, Claudia, and Karen Baehler, 2010. Adding Value to Policy Analysis and
   Advice. Sydney, Australia: University of New South Wales Press.
Stokey, Edith, and Richard Zeckhauser. 1978. A Primer for Policy Analysis. New York:
   Norton.
Sutton, Michele. 2008. Graduation with Options: Recommendations for Designing
   and Implementing the American Diploma Project in California. University of
   California, Berkeley.
Victorio, Andres G. 1995. Applied Models in Public Policy. Manila: Ateneo de
   Manila University.
Weick, Karl E. 1979. The Social Psychology of Organizing. 2nd ed. Reading, Mass.:
   Addison-Wesley.
Weimer, David L., and Aidan R. Vining. 2004. Policy Analysis: Concepts and
   Practice. 4th ed. Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall.
Zerbe, Richard O., Jr., and Howard E. McCurdy. 1999. The Failure of Market
   Failure. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 18 (4): 558–578.
                      INDEX




Access to informants, 89–97            Assumptions
  cultivating access, 92–93              breaking loose from, 114–115
  exhausting access, 93–94               in design of policy alternatives,
  getting an appointment, 90–92               27–28
Activities of government. See          Audience gauging, 71–72, 126n
     Government activities
Advocacy organizations, 14, 85         Barzelay, Michael, 118
A fortiori estimation, 53n             Base case, 66–68
Agency budgets, 145                    Benefit-cost analysis, 34–35, 53
Alternatives                           Best practices, 14–15. See also Smart
  compared to outcomes in                   practices
       trade-offs, 63                  Best practices research, 109
  defined, 16–17                       Bibliography, 76, 86
  distinguished from criteria, 46–47   Bluffing in interviews, 99, 101, 102n
Alternatives, construction of, 16–31   Break-even analysis, 50–53, 65–66,
  comprehensiveness of, 17–18               136n
  conceptualize and simplify list of   Brookings Institution, 85
       alternatives, 21–22             Budgets
  design policy alternatives, 24–31      agency budgets, 145
  linguistic pitfalls, 16–17             considering targets and, 25
  model the system, 19–21                expenditure control budget, 113
  points on continuum, 23–24           Burden of justification, 50
American Enterprise Institute          Bureaucratic reforms, 149
     (AEI), 85                         Business as usual, 18, 66–67
Analogies, use of, 15                  By-products of personal aspirations, 8b
Analysis, specimen of real-world
     policy, 125–139                   Calibration in language, 103–104
Analytic plotline, 31–32               Case processing system, 28–30
Appointments with informants,          Cato Institute, 86
     90–92. See also Interviews        Causal models, 19–21



                                                                             171
1 7 2    I N D E X




Center on Budget and Policy           Cost-based pricing, 8b
    Priorities, 86                    Cost-effectiveness analysis, 34–35, 64,
Centralization/decentralization,           125n, 131–132, 134, 136f
    questions to ask, 156             Courtesy, 90–91, 92
Change, questions to ask, 157         The CQ Researcher Online, 86
Characterization, 103–104, 115–116,   Credibility, 15–16, 81, 104–106
    117–118                           Criteria, evaluative, 33–37
Client, as audience, 71                 efficiency, 33–36
Commensurability, 64–66                 equality, equity, fairness, justice, 36
Common ground, xix                      freedom, community, and other
Communications and culture,                  ideas, 36–37
    questions to ask, 156             Criteria, practical, 41–44
Community criteria, 36–37               legality, 41
Comparative analysis outcomes           political acceptability, 41–42
    matrix, 59, 60t                     robustness and improvability,
Competitor variation, 21                     42–44
Complementarity, 8b                   Criteria selection, 31–47
Complexity allowed in smart             commonly used evaluative criteria,
    practices, 117–119                       33–37
Comprehensiveness, 17–18                commonly used practical criteria,
Compulsive qualifying in                     41–44
    storytelling, 73                    compared to alternatives, 46–47
Conceptualizing alternatives, 21–22     criteria as logical constructs, 44–46
Conceptual terms of criteria, 45–46     in specimen of policy analysis,
Concessions, 163–164                         126n
Congressional Budget Office, 86         weighting conflicting evaluative
Conservative issue rhetoric, 4               criteria, 37–41
Conservative think tanks, 85–86       Criticism, defending against,
Consultation and education, 148            104–105
Continuous improvement, 157           Critics of policy work, 15–16
Continuous variables, 23–24           Culture and communications,
Continuum points as alternatives,          questions to ask, 156
    23–24
Contracting and financing, 148–149    Data, 11, 90
Conventions, breaking loose from,     Databases as sources, 86
    114–115                           Debts, 163–164
Cooperative project between           Decentralization/centralization,
    rehabilition and recycling,           questions to ask, 156
    114, 116                          Deception in interviews, 102n
Co-producers and front-line           Decision making, 69–70
    workers, questions to ask, 155     twenty-dollar-bill test, 69–70
                                                                   I N D E X    1 7 3




Deficit and excess, 1–2                  Effectiveness, 50–52
Definition of the problem, 1–11          Efficiency as evaluative criteria,
  common pitfalls in, 8–10                    33–36
  diagnose conditions that cause         Eightfold path, xvi–xix, 1–78
       problems, 6                         assemble some evidence, 11–16
  evaluative definition, use of, 2–5       confront the trade-offs, 63–69
  iterate, 10–11                           construct the alternatives, 16–31
  latent opportunities, 7                  decide, 69–70
  opportunities for social                 define the problem, 1–11
       improvement, 8b–9b                  problem-solving process,
  quantitative feature, 5–6                      xvii–xviii
  risky conditions and the odds, 6–7       project the outcomes, 47–63
  in terms of deficit and excess, 1–2      revisit in smart practices, 123
Delivery processes/production,             select the criteria, 31–47
     questions to ask, 154                 spirit of, xviii–xix
Demonstration programs, 122                tell your story, 70–78
Depletable resources, 163, 165           Emergent-features problem, 57–58
Designing policy alternatives, 24–31     Enhancement strategies, 121
  assumption checking, 27–28             Enthusiasm, 123
  design case processing system,         Environmental Protection Agency
       28–30                                  (EPA), 21–22
  initial steps on design elements,      Environment, questions to ask, 151–152
       26–27                             Equality, equity, fairness, and justice
  look for similar design efforts,            criteria, 36
       25–26                             Ethical costs of optimism, 57
  roughness of design for initial        Ethics of bluffing and deception in
       public review, 30–31                   interviews, 102n
  targets and budget consideration, 25   Evaluative criteria, 33–37. See also
Desired services, 145                         Criteria, evaluative
Development, 9b                          Evaluative plotline, 31–32. See also
Diagnostic problem definition, 6, 10          Criteria selection
Documents as sources, 83–87              Evaluative problem definition, 2–5
Dominance, 63, 64                        Evidence
Dynamic analysis of gathering              defined, 11–12
     political support, 159–165            value of, 13
                                         Evidence assembly, 11–16, 79–107
Economic activity, 147                     analogies, use of, 15
Educated guess, 13–14                      conduct policy research interview,
Educational process in criteria                  94–103
    selection, 38                          defend against politically inspired
Education and consultation, 148                  criticism, 104–105
1 7 4    I N D E X




  educated guessing, 13–14               Fixed resources, 35
  free the captive mind, 16              Ford Foundation/Kennedy School of
  gain access and engage assistance,         Government, 113n, 114n
       89–94                             Freedom criteria, 36–37
  gain and protect credibility, 15–16,   Free lunches, 110–114
       81, 104–106                       Front-line workers and co-producers,
  get started, 15, 80–82                     questions to ask, 155
  locate relevant sources, 82–89         Functions distinguished from
  prepare for premature exposure,            features, 116–117
       106
  review available literature, 14        Gaebler, Ted, 113
  strategic dilemmas of policy           Generic opportunities for social
       research, 106–107                      improvement, 8b–9b
  survey best practices, 14–15           Generic vulnerabilities, 119–120
  think before collecting evidence,      Gossip, 97
       12–14                             Government Accountability Office, 86
  use language to characterize and       Government activities, 141–149
       calibrate, 103–104                  agency budgets, 145
Evolutionary models, 21                    bureaucratic and political
Example of real-world policy                    reforms, 149
     analysis, 125–139                     coax creativity with checklist,
Excess and deficit, 1–2                         17–18
Exchange, 9b                               economic activity, 147
Exemplars of smart practice,               education and consultation, 148
     118–119                               financing and contracting, 148–149
Expenditure control budget, 113            information, 145–146
External validity problems, 110            private rights, structure of,
Extra, as linguistic device, 68                 146–147
                                           regulation, 142–143
Fairness criteria, 36                      service provision, 144–145
Farkas, George, 112                        subsidies and grants, 143–144
Favors, 163–164                            taxes, 141–142
Features distinguished from              Government intervention, 147
     functions, 116–117                  Grandma Bessie test, 70–71
Federal Trade Commission (FTC)           Grants and subsidies, 143–144
     and warranty obligations, 58        Greater Avenues to Independence
Feedback, 16, 30                              (GAIN) program, 111–112
51-49 principle, 48
Financing and contracting, 148–149       Heritage Foundation, 86
Firsthand information, 88                Holder-in-due-course doctrine, 58
Fixed output, 35                         Human life, worth of, 65–66
                                                                  I N D E X    1 7 5




Human rights, 41                         Leadership, questions to ask,
Hypothetical policy, 130                      156–157
                                         Learn more, 18
Implementation process, 42–43            Legal citation style, 76
Improvability as practical criteria,     Legality as practical criteria, 41
      42–44                              Legal rights, 41, 146–147
Incentive effects, 143–144               Leverage of defensive informants,
Informants                                    98–103
   leveraging defensive informants,      Liberal issue rhetoric, 4
        98–103                           Liberal think tanks, 85–86
   timing to approach, 106–107           Libraries as sources, 86
   See also Evidence assembly;           Linear programming, 44–45
        Interviews                       Linguistic clarity in criteria
Information                                   selection, 45
   defined, 11                           Linguistic pitfalls, 16–17, 46–47,
   as government activity, 145–146            116–117
Input substitution, 8b                   Listing without explaining in
Intentionality, 47                            storytelling, 74
Internal validity problems, 110          Literacy programs, 112
Internet, 85–86                          Literature, review available, 14
Interventions, 19                        Logical constructs, criteria
Interviews                                    as, 44–46
   consulting people as sources,         Logical narrative flow of story,
        83–84                                 72–73
   policy research interview, 94–103.    Logic models, 27–28, 29
        See also Policy research         Logic of projection, 48–49
        interviews                       Long-term policy analysis, 54
Invisible hand of the market, 111
Issue rhetoric, 4–5                      Magnitude estimates, 5–6, 49–50
Iteration of problem definition, 10–11   Management of cases, 28–29
                                         Mandatory minimum sentences for
Journal of Policy Analysis and               drug dealers, xx, 125–139,
     Management, 76                          160–165
Justice criteria, 36                     Market failure, 2–3
                                         Market models, 20, 128n
Kellogg Foundation, 28                   Medium for storytelling, 72
Knowledge, searching for, 88–89          Memo format, 76–77
                                         Memo writing, 80–81
Latent opportunities, identification     Metaphors, 48
    of, 7                                Milestone payments to nonprofit
Latent potential of opportunities, 111       service contractors, 113–117
1 7 6    I N D E X




Mission, questions to ask, 151         Outcomes
Mississippi problem, 123                evaluative criteria and, 32
Models                                  focusing on, to confront trade-offs,
 of bureaucracy, 43–44                       63–64
 and evidence to project outcomes,      performance measurement,
       48–49                                 questions to ask, 152–153
 logic models, 27–28, 29               Outcomes matrix, 58–62
 mathematical, 127                      comparative analysis example,
 of political process, 42                    59, 60t
 of system containing problem,         Outcomes projection, 47–63
       19–21                            break-even estimates and problem
Money as commensurable metric,               of uncertainty, 50–53
    64–66                               confronting optimism problem,
Monte Carlo simulation, 53–54                54–57
Moral hazard, 56                        connecting to design problems,
Multi-attribute problem, 65                  62–63
Multiple functions, 9b                  constructing outcomes matrix,
Mutually exclusive alternatives, 17          58–62
                                        emergent-features problem, 57–58
Narrative of story, 72–73               extending logic of projection,
National Journal, 86                         48–49
Natural rights, 41                      magnitude estimates, 49–50
New public management                   sensitivity analysis, 53–54
    (NPM), 118                          in specimen of policy analysis,
Niskanen, William, 94n                       127n
Nonprofit organizations in             Outputs, 152
    partnership, 113                   Overregulation, 56
Nontraditional participants, 9b
                                       Partners and other outsiders,
Odds and risky conditions, 6–7              questions to ask, 155
Operational terms of criteria, 45–46   Partnership for park maintenance,
Operations research strategies, 8b          between public sector and
Opportunities, latent, 7                    citizens, 113, 120
 for social improvement, 8b–9b         Paternalistic services, 145
Optimism problem, 54–57                People as sources, 83–87
 ethical costs of optimism, 57         Performance measurement,
 scenario writing, 54–55                    questions to ask, 152–153
 undesirable side effects, 56–57       Personalities, discussing, 97–98
Oral presentations, 72                 Person-changing program, 29
Osborne, David, 113                    Piling on, 55
Other guy’s shoes, 57–58               Pilot programs, 122
                                                                     I N D E X    1 7 7




Pitfalls                                    Postbureaucratic paradigm, 118
  linguistic tip on alternatives,           PowerPoint presentation, 77–78
        16–17, 46–47                        Practical criteria, 41–44. See also
  presented by smart practices, 109             Criteria, practical
  in problem definition, 8–10               Practice, defined, 110
  in storytelling, 73–74                    Premature exposure, 106
Points on continuum as alternatives,        Present trends, let continue, 18, 123
     23–24                                  Press releases, 77
Policy analysis                             Principal objective to be maximized/
  questions to ask, 151–157                     minimized, 44
  specimen of real-world, 125–139           Private legal rights, 146–147
Policy analysts, xv                         Private troubles warranting
  contact information for, 93                   definition as public problems,
  imposing solutions, 38                        2–3
  reputation of, 91–92, 94                  Problem definition. See Definition of
Policy research                                 the problem
  compared to social science                Problem-solving process, xvii–xviii.
        research, 82, 88n, 104                  See also Eightfold path
  strategic dilemmas of, 106–107            Process values and evaluative
  See also Evidence assembly                    criteria, 37
Policy research interviews, 94–103          Production/delivery processes,
  energize and steer the                        questions to ask, 154
        conversation, 95–98                 Production models, 20
  gain access to informants, 89–93          Program, referring to routines, 29
  leverage defensive informants,            Projecting outcomes. See Outcomes
        98–103                                  projection
  use language of characterize and          Psychological difficulties in
        calibrate, 103–104                      projecting outcomes, 47–48
Political acceptability, 41–42              Public and nonprofit institutions,
Political credibility, 15–16, 81, 104–106       questions to ask, 151–157.
Political orientations, 85–86                   See also Questions to ask
Political process and weighting             Public interest, 159
     evaluative criteria, 37                Public review, roughness of design,
Political reforms, 149                          30–31
Political self-interest, 91, 94
Political support, strategic advice on      Quantitative feature of problem
     dynamics, 159–165                         definition, 5
Politics of organization                    Questions to ask, 151–157
  questions to ask, 156                      centralization/decentralization, 156
  weighting of evaluative criteria           change and continuous
        and, 37                                   improvement, 157
1 7 8    I N D E X




   culture and communications, 156      Rights
   environment, 151–152                   distribution and criteria selection,
   front-line workers and                      38–41
        co-producers, 155                 legality as practical criteria, 41
   leadership, 156–157                    structure of private rights, 146–147
   mission, 151                         Risky conditions and the odds, 6–7
   partners and other outsiders, 155    Robustness as practical criteria,
   performance measurement,                  42–44
        152–153
   politics, 156                        Safeguarding strategies, 121
   production/delivery processes, 154   Scaling up penalty, 122
   technology, 153–154                  Scenario writing, 54–55
                                        Scientific citation, 76
RAND Corporation analysis               Secondhand information, 87
  on juvenile crime prevention          Selection mechanism, 21
       strategies, 122                  Semantic tips, xix
  mandatory minimum sentences             alternative as linguistic pitfall,
       for drug dealers, xx,                   16–17
       125–139, 161                       alternatives compared to criteria,
  three-strikes incarceration policy           46–47
       in California, 35–36, 67           benefit-cost analysis, 53
Reading One-to-One, 112                   conceptualization and
Realism vs. optimism, 48                       simplification, 21–22
Realistic expectations for research,      deficit and excess, 1–2
    109–110                               define solution into the problem,
Recycling programs, 114, 116                   8–10
References, and sources in written        diagnosis of conditions that cause
    report, 76. See also Sources               problems, 6
Regulation, 142–143                       distinguish functions and features,
Regulatory program and routines, 29            116–117
Rehabilitation programs, 114, 116         evaluative criteria and projected
Reinventing Government (Osborne &              outcomes, 32
    Gaebler), 113                         evidence, data, and information,
Relativism, 40                                 11–12
Rent-seekers, 56–57                       extra, as linguistic device, 68
Research. See Policy research             human rights and legal rights, 41
Research strategy, 80–82                  language of characterization,
Resources for the Future, 86                   103–104
Retention mechanism, 21                   linguistic clarity in criteria
Rhetorical questions, 131n, 134n,              selection, 45
    137n, 138n                            the odds, 7
                                                                  I N D E X    1 7 9




  outcomes matrix, 61–62                   and references in written report, 76
  outcomes projection connecting to        searching for sources and
       design problems, 62–63                    searching for knowledge,
  practices take advantage, 114                  88–89
  present trends vs. do nothing, 18        secondhand information, 87
  realistic expectations for research,     See also Informants
       109–110                           Specimen of policy analysis,
  scenarios in future perfect tense,          125–139
       55–56                             Specimens of smart practice,
Sensitivity analysis, 53–54, 132n             118–119
Sequencing in gathering political        Statistics to support credibility, 105
     support, 161                        Storytelling, 70–78
Service blueprinting, 28, 29               analytical vs. evaluative plotlines,
Service contractors, 113–114                     31–32
Service provision, 144–145                 common pitfalls, 73–74
Simplifying alternatives, 21–22            gauging the audience, 71–72, 126n
Smart practices, 109–123                   Grandma Bessie test, 70–71
  allow for variation and complexity,      linguistic pitfall of alternative,
       117–119                                   16–17
  assess target context, 121               logical narrative flow of, 72–73
  back to eightfold path, 123              medium, written or oral, 72
  break loose from conventions and         memo format, 76–77
       assumptions, 114–115                PowerPoint, 77–78
  characterize features of, 115–116        press releases, 77
  describe generic vulnerabilities,        references and sources, 76
       119–120                             structure of report, 75–76
  distinguish functions and features,      table format, 75–76
       116–117                           Strategic advice on dynamics of
  evaluate source contexts, 122–123           political support, 159–165
  find free lunches, 110–114             Strategic dilemmas of policy
  realistic expectations, 109–110             research, 106–107
Social regulation, 142–143               Strategy and variants, 22
Social science, 48–49                    Subsidies and grants, 143–144
Social science research, compared to     Supreme Court, authors of decisions,
     policy research, 82, 88n, 104            86–87
Source contexts, 122                     Switchpoint analysis, 51n
Sources, 82–89
  consulting documents and people,       Table format of report, 75–76
       83–87                             Target context, 121
  multiple sources of firsthand          Targets and budgets, 25
       information, 88                   Taxes, 141–142
1 8 0    I N D E X




Technology, 40, 142, 153–154          Underrepresentation, 38
Testing of practice, 123              Underutilized capacity, 9b
Think tanks, 85–86                    Undesirable side effects, 56–57
Threshold analysis, 50, 51n, 136n
Timing                                Validity problems, 110
  to approach informants, 106–107     Variants in strategy, 22
  in gathering political support,     Variation allowed in smart practices,
       161–165                             117–119
Total Quality Management              Variation among competitors, 21
     (TQM), 157                       Vulnerabilities, generic, 119–120
Trade-offs, confronting, 63–69
  choose a base case, 66–68           Warranty obligations, 58
  establish commensurability, 64–66   Wealth effects, 144, 147
  focus, narrow, deepen, 68–69        Web sites as sources, 85–86
  focus on outcomes, 63–64            Weighting conflicting evaluative
  in specimen of policy analysis,         criteria, 37–41, 126n, 127n
       139n                           Welfare-to-work program, high
Treatment in case management,             expectations, 111–112, 115, 116,
     28, 29                               119–120
Trial and error, 25, 27               Written policy-analytic report,
Twenty-dollar-bill test, 69–70            xviii, 72
                                       defending against politically
Unanticipated consequences, 56              inspired criticism, 104–105
Uncertainty problem, 50–53             structure of, 75–76
